---
pmid: 33467283
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/33467283
title: Addressing the Confusion within Periodization Research.
---

Communication
Addressing the Confusion within
Periodization Research

W. Guy Hornsby 1,*

, Andrew C. Fry 2

, G. Gregory Haﬀ 3

and Michael H. Stone 4

1 College of Physical Activity and Sport Sciences, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26505, USA
2 Osness Human Performance Laboratory, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045, USA; acfry@ku.edu
3

School of Medical and Health Sciences, Edith Cowan University, Joondalup 6027, Australia;
g.haﬀ@ecu.edu.au

4 Center of Excellence for Sport Science and Coach Education, SERK, East Tennessee State University,

Johnson City, TN 37614, USA; stonem@etsu.edu
* Correspondence: william.hornsby@mail.wvu.edu

Received: 21 July 2020; Accepted: 27 August 2020; Published: 28 August 2020

Abstract:
In this editorial, we focus on recent problematic developments in sport science,
and more speciﬁcally, problems related to periodization research. Primary areas discussed are
(1) appreciation of history, (2) considerations for training studies, (3) the development of concepts,
and (4) programming-driven training models.

Keywords: periodization; training; sport science

1. Introduction

Over the last several years, disturbing trends related to sport science research and education
related to the periodization of training have been noted by the authors of this editorial. Speciﬁcally,
it appears that there is an increased push by researchers to promote “outside the box thinking”.
Certainly, questioning poorly supported dogma and popular belief(s) is at the root of the scientiﬁc
process. However, for areas of research that have a solid underpinning supported by good scientiﬁc
data and considerable previous work, appropriate appreciation and understanding should take place
before a dismissal of these works occurs. This does not mean that previous ﬁndings cannot be
challenged or cannot be further developed, as this is a key aspect of the scientiﬁc process. However,
we believe that most accepted conceptual paradigms of basic and applied science, including sport
science, are ﬁrmly rooted in logical reasoning and supporting evidence. We also believe that most good
conceptual paradigms develop and evolve over time as a result of critical thinking, sound research
(often painstaking), and a diligent search for clarity. As such, a central goal of this editorial is to inspire
future research.

A troubling current trend in academics appears to be an “everything we have been taught is
wrong” attitude, carried out with an intent to create controversy, and this trend has spilled over
into sport science research, particularly as it pertains to periodization. Perhaps some (much?) of
these issues are related to/inﬂuenced by social media (of which we readily admit that we are not
experts). Researchers are now more connected virtually, with others across the globe leading to
constant commentary, for better and for worse. Several of the authors have been scientists for a long
time (>30 years), and we unanimously feel that today’s students and young scientists are developing
in a climate that is too focused on self-promotion and too often misses the big picture. Over the last
several years, we have read many review and opinion papers [1–4] on periodization in which we feel
the questioning is far too simplistic (e.g., questioning a referenced statement or using a circumscribed
thought process more common in the basic sciences) and misses the breadth and robustness of the

J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2020, 5, 68; doi:10.3390/jfmk5030068

www.mdpi.com/journal/jfmk

Journal ofFunctional Morphology and Kinesiology(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2020, 5, 68

2 of 7

historical development of periodization (which is well beyond the scope of this editorial). Thus, we feel
it is worth brieﬂy discussing the current climate of periodization research/commentary and addressing
several aspects of several speciﬁc issues. Below are three primary issues related to periodization
research followed by a brief commentary on a newer development within the ﬁeld.

2. Appreciation of History

Recently, it seems that a more commonly held belief has arisen that “older” research is out of
date and less helpful than recently published research. This can result in authors selectively choosing
references or statements; potentially missing important work; or worse, speciﬁcally choosing studies
that ﬁt one’s personal narrative. It is particularly surprising how research in the areas of resistance
exercise, strength-power development, etc., performed in 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s was perhaps the
biggest “lift” in knowledge the ﬁeld has experienced [5], and yet many authors only cite work
performed in the last 15 years. As authors we have, on several occasions, been told by reviewers to
replace a reference of an older study with a more current study or even provided the suggestion that
a reference is “too old”, apparently dismissing older work. It is worth noting that if only current
research is valuable, that means that what we are doing today will eventually become obsolete and
valueless. We believe an appreciation of historical work may be helpful for limiting the cyclical,
“re-invention of the wheel” nature of some training and research practices.

A lack of appreciation of older literature may lead to improper citing of that older literature
(when it is cited) or at the very least lead to misinterpretation of this research. Perhaps most importantly,
there does not seem to be an appreciation for the development and evolution of ideas and concepts.
We have been particularly dismayed at several recent papers that have used details from older references
to dismiss entire concepts that evolved from these initial studies [1,2]. Additionally, we often read
a basic statement regarding an aspect of periodization suggesting that it is relatively simplistic and
straightforward information when in fact it is much more layered and complex [1–4].

One example of a common oversimpliﬁcation is the reference of Lenoid P. Matveyev (USSR)
being recognized as the “Father” of periodization. While Matveyev did formalize the periodization
conceptual paradigm, he clearly built on previous work and contributed to the evolution of the
paradigm. The historical development of periodization has a long and rich history dating back several
centuries to the ancient writings of Philostratus; Galen; Avorroes; and, more recently, L. Pihkala
(1930s–1950s, Finland), L. Nadori (1940–1960s, Hungary), and N.G. Ozolin (1940s–1960s, Soviet Union).
A few of the earliest texts, written in English, that describe breaking up the training plan into “periods”
include books by G. Dyson (A New System of Training, 1946), W. Bresnahan and G. Tuttle (Track and
Field Athletics, 1947), and K. Doherty (Modern Track and Field, 1963) [6,7]. While these are only
a few examples within the vast history that underpins the theory of periodization, it demonstrates
that prior to Matveyev’s seminal contribution to the topic there was in fact foundational work being
completed [6]. For an incredibly in-depth look into the history of periodization (particularly for track
and ﬁeld.), we refer the reader to Bourne, 2008 [6].

Indeed, Matveyev’s contribution to periodization, particularly his observational work on
periodization monitoring of the Soviet track and ﬁeld athletes preparing for the 1952 and 1956 Olympic
Games, and later, his text describing an annual training plan (1965), cannot be underappreciated [8].
It is worth mentioning that Matveyev was observing athletes being coached by full-time coaches
who were creating the training plans (not Matveyev), and likely the reason for the popularity and
attachment (credit) to the traditional (or classic) model of periodization is due to the 1965 text,
Periodization of Sports Training, being translated into English. For this textbook and the periodization
paradigm, many of the underlying mechanistic concepts had been previously developed by H. Selye,
N.N.Yakovlev, and I.P. Pavlov [9].

J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2020, 5, 68

3 of 7

3. Considerations for Training Studies

Discussions on the importance of the applied nature of sport and thus aspects related to that
understanding are well documented [10,11]. Too often in studies in which interventions are compared,
the interventions do not occur in a manner reﬂecting real-world application. We appreciate the “tug of
war” that sport scientists often face, trying to juggle internal validity (in an eﬀort to control certain
aspects) with real-world parameters. However, common eﬀorts to control certain aspects of a study,
such as equating volume when comparing two diﬀerent training strategies (likely changing 1 or both
programs from what typically occurs), or using a smith machine to control inter-subject technique
diﬀerences, etc., should be well addressed in the limitations and practical application portion of
a manuscript.

When discussing short-term training studies (the duration of most training interventions) [12], it is
important to consider that 2–3 months is only a blip in an athletes training life. Thus, periodization pioneer
Yuri Verkhoshansky explains, in the highly inﬂuential sport training textbook “Supertraining” . . .

“Virtually any method of strength training will enhance the strength of a novice during the ﬁrst few
months, provided the intensity, in particular, is kept at a safe level. This is a major reason why it is
misleading and counterproductive to apply the results obtained from scientiﬁc studies of less than
six months’ duration. It is also a major reason why relatively inexperienced coaches manage to have
initial success with athletes . . . ” [6].

We certainly appreciate how diﬃcult long-term periodization studies are, such as [13–15], as most of our
work, with a few exceptions [16,17], is rooted in semester length designs. We feel too often short term
(6–10 week) training studies are simply viewed as “what worked better at developing performance
adaption(s)?” (often, carried out on untrained or minimally trained subjects) vs. a more in-depth context
such as eﬃciency of training [17]; the amount of work (and thus, fatigue) necessary to maximize results;
and timing and direction of training, a coaches ability to direct and control the training process at certain
time points [18,19]. We continue to be surprised by the apparent disregard for highly ecologically valid
athlete monitoring studies capturing trained athletes in real-world environments [16,19–21] (these are
only a few in a long line of research). We fully understand the limitations of causation (no comparison
group, a “non-normal” sample); however, we believe this is some of the most helpful information for
coaches and sport scientists related to periodization as well as other aspects of training.

Another important consideration is the amount of detail related to the training that is performed.
Mujika [22] has previously called for authors of training studies to report volume load and detailed
information of the training prescription. This is critical, as many times based upon the training
information provided it is virtually impossible to replicate the intervention conducted. We believe that
journals should request that authors report how the training was veriﬁed (e.g., were the investigators
observing? Were they strength coaches? Was it a sport Coaches report? A self-report?). It is perhaps
not surprising that direct observation is superior to reporting from subjects [23]. Additionally, it would
be helpful for authors to state whether or not the training reported was the planned prescription,
beforehand, or if the training was recorded as it was carried out.

Lastly, most training studies referred to as periodization studies are really programming studies
(see discussion below), as the manipulation and comparisons of diﬀerent strategies are usually dictated
by diﬀerences in set-rep schemes, intensities, etc., and not by over-arching timelines or adaptation-based
ﬁtness phases and goals.

4. The Development of Concepts

Training concepts (e.g., training theory) can be astonishingly multifaceted and complex.
Sometimes in attempting to summarize basic, translational and applied science, the large amount
of physiology that goes into training concepts (e.g., ﬁtness–fatigue paradigm, General Adaptation
Syndrome, etc.) is lost. Related to bullet point #1 (history), to truly appreciate an established training
concept one must really know the historical literature. Additionally, for sport research it is also

J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2020, 5, 68

4 of 7

likely helpful to understand aspects well beyond the literature (coaching, training, sport, and history).
For example, using a very speciﬁc issue, that is a relative component within a larger concept, and
then dismissing the entire concept as a mistake: disregarding a mechanistic concept such as Selye’s
work on stress response because his original studies were not based on exercise as a paradigm and
therefore suggesting that the General Adaptation Syndrome (G.A.S.) cannot be used conceptually
in explaining the response to exercise and training [24]. Training concepts can be quite helpful for sport
scientists and coaches, as they allow complicated information from multiple scientiﬁc disciplines to be
synthesized for useful application [24,25]. Perhaps a worthwhile analogy is the comparison of athlete
skill to technical models of performance for various sport tasks (e.g., stages of sprinting or of the snatch
exercise). The summarizing nature of a technical model (or a training concept) can almost assuredly
be questioned and picked apart to some degree. For example, it could be pointed out that someone
incredibly successful (e.g., a gold medalist) did not perform in the exact manner recommended by the
technical model. Interestingly, it is quite commonly accepted that technical models have nuance and
“ranges”. This same degree of acceptance does not seem to hold for periodization [3,4].

5. Programming Driven Training Strategies

Lastly, we have read several articles and frequently observe discussions on social media incorrectly
portraying the idea that block periodization (or traditional periodization for that matter) is stagnate
and that the programming within the periodized plan cannot be modiﬁed if needed during its
implementation. Recently, there has been an increased push to use a training strategy that is more
in-the-moment-focused. Many terms have been used to describe these programming centered
training plans that involve a day to day organization template, for example, agile periodization,
ﬂexible periodization, and ﬂuid periodization [26–28].
Instead of a long-term, detailed training
prescription, this approach to training involves a format in which training is dictated by an athlete’s
alleged current state (e.g., readiness, and fatigue, which are often subjective), and to a large degree,
based on a certain selection format, assembled session to session. Conceptually, these training models are
not periodization models and are actually programming models, thus including the term periodization
is a misnomer [24]. This is because these ﬂexible training models are driven by day-to-day and
week-to-week programming decisions, often based on athletes’ subjective feelings and not objective
evidence or an over-arching periodization strategy. Periodization is a conceptual outline dealing with
timelines and ﬁtness phases; depending upon the goal of the training process, it creates time-direction
of training volume, intensity, and task speciﬁcity factors [25]. Programming drives the periodization
phases (makes the phases within the periodized plan happen) and includes exercise selections,
loading parameters, rest periods, etc. [24,25]. However, using a periodization model allows substantial
programming modiﬁcations to be made [25]. It should be noted that programming alterations should
be made based upon valid and reliable evidence concerning the state of the athlete, evidence that can be
provided by a well-designed athlete monitoring process [29]. Indeed, programming alterations should
be based on good data; a well-conceived, integrated long-term plan; and in most cases, be subtle.

Within U.S. Collegiate sport and Australian professional sports, we continue to be surprised
by how often we hear “periodization doesn’t work for team sports” or the more general statement
“periodization doesn’t work for my situation.” We have speculated that perhaps avoiding this long-term
planning approach is due to how strength coaches are often placed in a servant type role to the head
sport coach [30], and perhaps the idea is that these more ﬂexible approaches allow the strength coach to
work around the head sport coach. We believe this thinking is ﬂawed, in that (1) attempting to manage
a more unpredictable situation with more unpredictability is a mistake, and (2) the programming
within a periodized plan can be altered if need be, while being guided by the overall goal(s) of the given
training phase. Or, as more eloquently stated by Bourne [6], “the use of periodization is synonymous
with a scientiﬁc approach to training as coaches, scientists, and athletes attempt to gain maximal
control over the variables aﬀecting the adaptive process.”

J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2020, 5, 68

5 of 7

6. Conclusions

Recently, we (along with many colleagues) authored a letter to the editor (LTE) [31] addressing
what we felt were issues in a recent article by Buckner et al. [2]. In the same issue of Medicine and
Science in Sports and Exercise, Buckner et al. responded to our LTE [32]. For a much better picture of
the overall discourse, we refer the reader to those papers, which address several important concepts of
strength development [2,31,32]. Of particular note are some of the statements made in the follow up
by Buckner et al. [32] regarding periodization that we thought were worth addressing. We appreciate
that skeptics are acknowledging the complexities of periodization, and this is an important step
in understanding and interpreting the scientiﬁc literature. However, simple blanket statements seldom
explain the intricacies of advanced training methods for high-level performance. Although there is
certainly much work remaining, characterizing the arguments as “everything is periodization”, or that
“periodization has not been well studied” or “appropriately studied”, suggests an unfortunate lack
of understanding of the topic. Additionally, an appreciation of the diﬀerences in training advanced
and elite-level competitors with long training histories compared to the very forgiving population of
untrained or novice individuals, who readily respond to almost any training stimulus, is essential for
making sense of the available data. The ability to implement scientiﬁcally-based training programs
with populations of all training and performance levels, and to work closely in concert with the
actual coaches and trainers, is certainly a critical part of the process. Unlike the researcher who
is often simply searching for statistically signiﬁcant results, or evidence of a recognizable training
eﬀect, the eﬀective sport scientist, coach, and trainer strives for optimum performance results at
competition time. Recognizing and developing all facets of successful performance is critical to achieve
the desired consistent and long-term results, whether it is on the athletic ﬁeld or in any occupation
requiring high levels of performance. Only through the application of these training paradigms with
actual high-level performers can the external/ecological validity of the training methods be properly
established. This discourse on the topic of periodization certainly validates our long history of careful
study of this complex topic, and we eagerly look forward to conducting many future studies related to
periodization. Like with many research topics, those who produce the scientiﬁc data on the eﬃcacy of
periodization quickly appreciate the inherent challenges of this line of inquiry. In 1910, former U.S.
President Theodore Roosevelt may have summed it up best in one of his most famous speeches given
at the Sorbonne in Paris, France, where he cautioned of individuals who have “a readiness to criticize
work which the critic himself never tries to perform” [33]. It is hoped that authors eager to produce
numerous reviews and commentaries on this and related topics can supplement their work with
empirical research data from their labs, and we invite them to be part of the constructive eﬀort to
properly understand the science of periodization and programming.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, W.G.H., M.H.S., A.C.F., and G.G.H.; original draft preparation, W.G.H.,
M.H.S., A.C.F., and G.G.H.; writing—review and editing, W.G.H., M.H.S., A.C.F., and G.G.H. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.

2.

3.

Buckner, S.L.; Mouser, J.G.; Dankel, S.J.; Jessee, M.B.; Mattocks, K.T.; Loenneke, J.P. The General Adaptation
Syndrome: Potential misapplications to resistance exercise. J. Sci. Med. Sport 2017, 20, 1015–1017. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Buckner, S.L.; Jessee, M.B.; Mouser, J.G.; Dankel, S.J.; Mattocks, K.T.; Bell, Z.W.; Abe, T.; Loenneke, J.P.
The Basics of Training for Muscle Size and Strength. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2020, 52, 645–653. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Kiely, J. New horizons for the methodology and physiology of training periodization: Block periodization:
New horizon or a false dawn? Sports Med. 2010, 40, 803–805. [CrossRef]

J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2020, 5, 68

6 of 7

4.

5.

6.

7.

Kiely, J. Periodization Theory: Confronting an Inconvenient Truth. Sports Med. 2017, 48, 753–764. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Shurley, J.P.; Todd, J.S.; Todd, T.C.; Todd, J. The Science of Strength. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2017, 31, 517–530.
[CrossRef]
Bourne, D.N. Fast Science: A History of Training Theory and Methods for Elite Runners through 1975.
Electronic Dissertation, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA, 2008.
Verkoshansky, Y.; Siﬀ, M.C. Sports Speciﬁc Strength Training. In Supertraining; Verkoshansky SSTM: Rome,
Italy, 2009; pp. 95–124.

8. Matveyev, L. Periodization of Sports Training; Fizkultura i Sport: Moskow, Russia, 1965.
9.

Kruger, A. From Russia with love? Sixty years of proliferation of L.P. Matveyev’s concept of periodisation?
Staps 2016, 114, 51–59.
Stone, M.H.; Sands, W.A.; Stone, M.E. The downfall of sports science in the United States. Strength Cond. J.
2004, 26, 72–75. [CrossRef]

10.

11. Bishop, D.J. An Applied Research Model for the Sport Sciences. Sports Med. 2008, 38, 253–263. [CrossRef]
12. Cissik, J.; Hedrick, A.; Barnes, M. Challenges Applying the Research on Periodization. Strength Cond. J. 2008,

30, 45–51. [CrossRef]

13. Pallares, J.G.; García-Fernández, M.; Sánchez-Medina, L.; Izquierdo, M. Performance changes in world-class
kayakers following two diﬀerent training periodization models. Graefes Arch. Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol. 2010,
110, 99–107. [CrossRef]
Issurin, V.; Timofeyev, I.; Sharobajko, G.; Razumov, D. Zemliakov Particularities of Annual Preparation of
Top-Level Canoe-Kayak Paddlers during the 1984–1988 Olympic Cycle; Leningrad Institute of Physical Culture:
Saint Petersburg, Russia, 1988.

14.

15. Mallo, J. Eﬀect of block periodization on performance in competition in a soccer team during four consecutive

seasons: A case study. Int. J. Perform. Anal. Sport 2011, 11, 476–485. [CrossRef]

16. Hornsby, W.G.; Gentles, J.; Macdonald, C.J.; Mizuguchi, S.; Ramsey, M.W.; Stone, M.H. Maximum Strength,
Rate of Force Development, Jump Height, and Peak Power Alterations in Weightlifters across Five Months
of Training. Sports 2017, 5, 78. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Suarez, D.G.; Mizuguchi, S.; Hornsby, W.G.; Cunanan, A.; Marsh, D.J.; Stone, M.H. Phase-Speciﬁc Changes
in Rate of Force Development and Muscle Morphology Throughout a Block Periodized Training Cycle
in Weightlifters. Sports 2019, 7, 129. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

17.

18. Painter, K.B.; Haﬀ, G.G.; Ramsey, M.R.; McBride, J.; Triplett, T.T.; Sands, W.A.; Stone, M.H. Strength gains:
Block vs. DUP weight-training among track and ﬁeld athletes. Int. J. Sports Physiol. Perform. 2012, 7, 161–169.
[CrossRef]

19. Moore, C.; Fry, A.C. Nonfunctional Overreaching During Football Oﬀ-Season Training for Skill Position

Players in Collegiate American Football. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2007, 21, 793–800.

20. Bazyler, C.D.; Mizuguchi, S.; Harrison, A.P.; Sato, K.; Kavanaugh, A.A.; DeWeese, B.H.; Stone, M.H. Changes
in Muscle Cross Sectional Area, Explosive Ability, and Track and Field Throwing Performance throughout
a Competition Season and Following a Taper. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2005, 10, 2785–2793.

21. Bazyler, C.D.; Mizuguchi, S.; Sole, C.J.; Suchomel, T.J.; Sato, K.; Kavanaugh, A.A.; Deweese, B.H.; Stone, M.H.
Jumping Performance is Preserved but Not Muscle Thickness in Collegiate Volleyball Players after a Taper.
J. Strength Cond. Res. 2018, 32, 1020–1028. [CrossRef]

22. Mujika, I. The alphabet of sport science starts with Q. Int. J. Sports Physiol. Perform. 2013, 8, 465–466.

[CrossRef]

23. Prince, S.A.; Adamo, K.B.; E Hamel, M.; Hardt, J.; Gorber, S.C.; Tremblay, M. A comparison of direct versus
self-report measures for assessing physical activity in adults: A systematic review. Int. J. Behav. Nutr.
Phys. Act. 2008, 5, 56. [CrossRef]

24. Cunanan, A.J.; DeWeese, B.H.; Wagle, J.P.; Carroll, K.; Sausaman, R.; Hornsby, W.G., III; Haﬀ, G.G.;
Triplett, N.T.; Pierce, K.P.; Stone, M.H. The General Adaptation Syndrome: A Foundation for the Concept of
Periodization. Sports Med. 2018, 48, 787–797. [CrossRef]

25. Deweese, B.H.; Hornsby, G.; Stone, M.; Stone, M.H. The training process: Planning for strength–power
training in track and ﬁeld. Part 1: Theoretical aspects. J. Sport Heal. Sci. 2015, 4, 308–317. [CrossRef]
Jovani´c, M. Strength Training Manual: The Agile Periodization Approach; Complementary Training: Belgrade,
Serbia, 2019; Volume 1.

26.

J. Funct. Morphol. Kinesiol. 2020, 5, 68

7 of 7

27. McNamara, J.M.; Stearne, D.J. Flexible Nonlinear Periodization in a Beginner College Weight Training Class.

J. Strength Cond. Res. 2010, 24, 17–22. [CrossRef]

28. Morris, C.W. The Eﬀect of Fluid Periodization on Athletic Performance Outcomes in American Football

Players. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA, 2005.
Sands, W.A.; Stone, M.H. Are you progressing and how would you know? Olymp. Coach. 2005, 17, 4–10.

29.
30. Hornsby, W.G.; Gleason, B.; Wathen, D.; Deweese, B.; Stone, M.; Pierce, K.; Wagle, J.; Szymanski, D.J.;
Stone, M.H. Servant or Service? The Problem and a Conceptual Solution. J. Intercoll. Sport 2017, 10, 228–243.
[CrossRef]
Stone, M.H.; Adams, K.; Bazyler, C.; Brewer, C.; Beckham, G.; Carroll, K.; Chetlin, R.D.; Comfort, P.;
Comstock, B.; Cunanan, A.; et al. On “The Basics of Training for Muscle Size and Strength. Med. Sci.
Sports Exerc. 2020, 52, 2047–2050. [CrossRef]

31.

32. Buckner, S.L.; Jessee, M.B.; Dankel, S.J.; Mattocks, K.T.; Bell, Z.W.; Abe, T.; Loenneke, J.P. Practicing the
Test Produces Strength Equivalent to Higher Volume Training. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2020, 52, 2051–2052.
[CrossRef]

33. Roosevelt, T. The Man in the Arena; Theodore Roosevelt Center at Dickinson State University: Dickinson, ND,

USA, 2020.

© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
