---
pmid: 34948583
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/34948583
title: The Effect of Periodization on Training Program Adherence.
---

Article
The Effect of Periodization on Training Program Adherence

Vicente Javier Clemente-Suárez 1,2
Jose A. Parraca 4,5,*

and Nuno Batalha 4,5

, Domingo Jesús Ramos-Campo 3

, José Francisco Tornero-Aguilera 1

,

1

Faculty of Sports Sciences, Universidad Europea de Madrid, 28670 Madrid, Spain;
vctxente@yahoo.es (V.J.C.-S.); josefrancisco.tornero@universidadeuropea.es (J.F.T.-A.)
2 Grupo de Investigación en Cultura, Educación y Sociedad, Universidad de la Costa,

Barranquilla 080002, Colombia

3 Departamento de Salud y Rendimiento, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain;

domingojesusramos@gmail.com

4 Departamento de Desporto e Saúde, Escola de Saúde e Desenvolvimento Humano, Universidade de Évora,

7005-869 Évora, Portugal; nmpba@uevora.pt

5 Comprehensive Health Research Centre (CHRC), Universidade de Évora, 7005-869 Évora, Portugal
* Correspondence: jparraca@uevora.pt

Abstract: The present research aimed to study the effect of three different training periodization
(traditional, reverse, and free training) on the aerobic performance, motivation, and adherence
of physically active athletes. We analysed the adherence to three different periodization training
programs: traditional, reverse, and free training periodization on the adherence of amateur triathletes.
For this aim, the individual adherence, motivation, and aerobic performance time and heart rate
(in a 1000 m running test) were evaluated before and after the completion of the three different
8-week periodization programs. The level of adherence to the reverse periodization was signiﬁcantly
higher than in traditional and free training. The number of dropouts in reverse and traditional
periodization was similar but lower than in the free training. Finally, neither of the periodization
programs improved aerobic performance and reverse training periodization decreased heart rate of
participants in a 1000 m running test.

Keywords: adherence; endurance; periodization; triathlon

Citation: Clemente-Suárez, V.J.;

Ramos-Campo, D.J.; Tornero-Aguilera,

J.F.; Parraca, J.A.; Batalha, N.

The Effect of Periodization on

Training Program Adherence. Int. J.

Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18,

12973. https://doi.org/10.3390/

ijerph182412973

Academic Editors: Diana Amado

Alonso, Miguel Fernández Del Olmo,

Fernando Del Villar Álvarez and

Daniel Collado Mateo

1. Introduction

Received: 12 November 2021

Accepted: 7 December 2021

Published: 9 December 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

with regard to jurisdictional claims in

published maps and institutional afﬁl-

iations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

The World Health Organization (WHO) deﬁnes adherence as “the extent to which
a person’s behaviour—taking medication, following a diet, and/or executing lifestyle
changes, corresponds with agreed recommendations from a health care provider.” In the
sports ﬁeld, adherence to training is the degree of fulﬁlment by athletes to tasks of all kinds
that the training entails.

Ideally, due to its intrinsic characteristics, sport and competitive context make it ideal
to promote sports commitment and, as long as the athlete achieves adequate motivation,
adherence to physical-sports practice [1]. Yet, it is common to see inappropriate adherence,
either by default or by excess, which can be decisive. Inappropriate adherence can occur
with respect to regular training sessions or in relation to various complementary measures
(preventive physiotherapy, pharmacological treatment, psychological training [2]). Authors
suggest that over 50% of subjects who enrol in a training program will drop out after the
ﬁrst six months [3,4], with the main reasons relating to failure, lack of improvement, or
changes in motivation [5]. Thus, motivation is a determining and key factor, and is the
most repeated in the scientiﬁc literature according to recent systematic reviews [6,7], along
with the ﬁgure of the coach on the behaviour and the motivation of his or her athletes [8].
Lack of motivation will lead to a failure of program adherence, and this is a big problem
to exercise periodization, since it is based on chronic changes in the athlete organism,
produced by an accumulation of the acute effects produced by different workloads. Thus,

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 12973. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182412973

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph

International Journal ofEnvironmental Researchand Public Health(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 12973

2 of 8

compromising the accumulative effect of workloads will diminish the chronic effects of the
periodization plan, leading to failure and lack of improvements [9].

Likewise, the different models of periodization seem to have an inﬂuence on the
motivational and adherence state of athletes. Colquhoun et al. 2017 [10] compared the
effect of traditional and ﬂexible daily undulating periodization on athlete’s adherence to
the program. Both types of periodization are based on a nonlinear undulating distribution
of the volume and intensity of workloads [11,12]. However, ﬂexible daily undulating
periodization allows the lifter to choose the order of the training sessions within a given
time frame. Results showed that allowing participants to choose the order of workloads
increased adherence to the program. McNamara and Stearne 2010 [13] also conducted a
similar study comparing the same two types of periodization, while also giving the subjects
in the ﬂexible type of undulating periodization the ability to choose what repetition scheme
they used each session. The ability of athlete’s to inﬂuence their workouts showed beneﬁcial
effects over adherence and athlete’s performance gains [13]. Yet, there are few studies
regarding reverse periodization, that is, where athletes start their preparation with high-
intensity and low-volume training, while gradually decreasing intensity and increasing
volume or, depending on the sport, maintaining intensity, and increasing volume during
the following training periods [14–16]; a training paradigm opposite to the traditional
training periodization based on developing high-volume and low-intensity training during
the ﬁrst periods of the periodization, with progressive increases in training intensity and
simultaneous decreases in training volumes of the consecutive periods [17,18].

In line reverse periodization, based on intensity training, the program training session
is based on high intensity interval training. These training models have shown higher
adherence and motivation than traditional continuous training, a fact related to the diversity
of intensities of high intensity interval training, the lower duration of this training, and a
lower monotony during the training sessions [19,20]

The extent to which athletes adhere to sport development programs is an important
issue for applied sport scientists since it can help to improve the development of adher-
ence to training programs and methodologies. Examining different training periodization
methodologies, such as traditional, reverse, and free training periodization, it was found
that one of the main modiﬁable and inﬂuencing factors during the training process is moti-
vation, which is essential. Despite the training being prescribed in an athletic, recreational,
or clinical situation, motivation and adherence are always major variables in determining
the program’s effectiveness [10]. Thus, the present research aimed to study the effect of
three different training periodization (traditional, reverse, and free training) in the aerobic
performance, motivation, and adherence of physically active athletes. We hypothesized
that reverse training periodization would present higher aerobic performance, motivation,
and adherence than traditional and free periodization models, according to the results
presented by previous studies.

2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Participants

A total of 30 physically active athletes were analysed (20 males: 26.8 ± 4.3 years;
174.6 ± 4.6 cm; 71.3 ± 5.7 kg; and 10 females: 24.3 ± 3.2 years; 165.2 ± 5.2 cm; 57.2 ± 4.5 kg)
participated in the present research. They were randomly divided into three training
groups: reverse training periodization (RTP, n:10), traditional training periodization (TTP,
n:10), and free training (FT, n:10). The study design and the procedures employed were
in accordance with ethical standards and the Declaration of Helsinki, being approved by
the university ethics committee (CIPI/002/17). Each participant was fully informed of the
risks associated with the study, and they gave written informed consent before the start of
the study.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 12973

3 of 8

2.2. Procedures and Design

In order to reach the study aim, participants were divided in three groups each one
conducting a different training periodization (reverse, traditional, free) over 8 weeks. Before
and after the 8 weeks the performance, adherence, and motivation of participants were
evaluated. The traditional periodization model is based in the sequentialization of volume
to intensity during the periodization. While reverse training periodization are based in an
opposed paradigm, ﬁrstly training intensity and then volume [21]. Then, the RTP group
started with an intensity-based training the ﬁrst 4 weeks of the program and ﬁnished
with volume-based training. The TTP performed in the opposite direction, and ﬁnally the
FT trained without any control of the researchers. The training load of participants was
analysed by the Training Impulse (TRIMP) method [22], quantifying the TRIMPS in the
ﬁrst and second month of training (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Distribution of Training Impulse (TRIMP) of each experimental group in the ﬁrst and
second month of training.

Running performance was measured by time at maximal effort over 2000 m, which
is associated with the maximal aerobic speed measured in incremental tests conducted
in a laboratory [15]. After a 10-min aerobic standardized warm up, participants were
instructed to run 2000 m at maximal speed on a track surface (temperature 18.2 ± 1.4 ◦C;
61.3 ± 2.1% humidity). The ﬁnal heart rate of participants was analysed by a Polar V800
(Polar, Kempele, Finland) following previous studies [23].

In order to analyse the motivations of participants with each training program, they
were asked after ﬁnalization of the 8 weeks of training to identify their motivation with the
training conducted using 0 (low motivation) to 10 (high motivation scale). To analyse the
adherence of participants, the number of participants in each training group was registered
before and after the 8 weeks of training.

2.3. Statistical Analysis

Data were analysed with the SPSS (IBM, NY, USA) for Windows statistical package
(v.21.0). Firstly, descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation) were calculated. Before
using parametric tests, the assumption of normality and homoscedasticity were veriﬁed
using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. A MANOVA with training groups as ﬁxed factor was
conducted to analyse differences in the two-moment analysis of every variable between the
three groups. A dependent T test was used to analyse modiﬁcation in pre- and post-training
interventions in each group. For all procedures, a level of p ≤ 0.05 was selected to indicate
statistical signiﬁcance.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x 3 of 8   2.2. Procedures and Design In order to reach the study aim, participants were divided in three groups each one conducting a different training periodization (reverse, traditional, free) over 8 weeks. Before and after the 8 weeks the performance, adherence, and motivation of participants were evaluated. The traditional periodization model is based in the sequentialization of volume to intensity during the periodization. While reverse training periodization are based in an opposed paradigm, firstly training intensity and then volume [21]. Then, the RTP group started with an intensity-based training the first 4 weeks of the program and finished with volume-based training. The TTP performed in the opposite direction, and finally the FT trained without any control of the researchers. The training load of participants was analysed by the Training Impulse (TRIMP) method [22], quantifying the TRIMPS in the first and second month of training (Figure 1).  Figure 1. Distribution of Training Impulse (TRIMP) of each experimental group in the first and second month of training. Running performance was measured by time at maximal effort over 2000 m, which is associated with the maximal aerobic speed measured in incremental tests conducted in a laboratory [15]. After a 10-min aerobic standardized warm up, participants were instructed to run 2000 m at maximal speed on a track surface (temperature 18.2 ± 1.4 °C; 61.3 ± 2.1 % humidity). The final heart rate of participants was analysed by a Polar V800 (Polar, Kempele, Finland) following previous studies [23]. In order to analyse the motivations of participants with each training program, they were asked after finalization of the 8 weeks of training to identify their motivation with the training conducted using 0 (low motivation) to 10 (high motivation scale). To analyse the adherence of participants, the number of participants in each training group was registered before and after the 8 weeks of training. 2.3. Statistical Analysis Data were analysed with the SPSS (IBM, NY, USA) for Windows statistical package (v.21.0). Firstly, descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation) were calculated. Before using parametric tests, the assumption of normality and homoscedasticity were verified using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. A MANOVA with training groups as fixed factor was conducted to analyse differences in the two-moment analysis of every variable between the three groups. A dependent T test was used to analyse modification in pre- and post-training interventions in each group. For all procedures, a level of p ≤ 0.05 was selected to indicate statistical significance. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 12973

4 of 8

3. Results

Reverse training periodization produced a signiﬁcant decrease in HR of participants,
but traditional and free training maintained their HR after the 8-week training period.
None of the training groups signiﬁcantly modiﬁed their performance in the running test
(Table 1). The basal HR presented signiﬁcant differences between free training and reverse
and traditional training groups. No differences were found in the 2000 m time between
groups in the basal sample, as well as in the HR after the 8-weeks of training. Nevertheless,
there were signiﬁcant differences between the 2000 m time between free and reverse
training groups after the 8-weeks training intervention (Table 2).

Table 1. Results of heart rate and 1000 m time before and after each training program.

Reverse

Traditional

Pre

Post

T

p

Pre

Post

T

p

Pre

Free

Post

T

p

190.4 ± 9.4

184.2 ± 11.0

−3.7

0.004

182.4 ± 7.4

184.3 ± 6.4

−1.0

0.358

185.0 ± 12.2

188.3 ± 13.2

0.5

0.652

242.5 ± 26.6

237.8 ± 25.4

1.2

0.278

240.1 ± 28.3

236.8 ± 25.4

2.0

0.064

266.0 ± 45.2

268.5 ± 38.5

−5.6

0.594

Heart rate
(bpm)

1000 m
time (s)

Table 2. Differences in heart rate and 1000 m time between experimental groups before and after the training programs.

Evaluation
Moment

Variable

Group

Group

Pre

Post

Reverse

Heart rate (bpm)

Traditional

Free

Reverse

1000 m time (s)

Traditional

Free

Reverse

Heart rate (bpm)

Traditional

Free

Reverse

1000 m time (s)

Traditional

Free

Traditional
Free
Reverse
Free
Reverse
Traditional

Traditional
Free
Reverse
Free
Reverse
Traditional

Traditional
Free
Reverse
Free
Reverse
Traditional

Traditional
Free
Reverse
Free
Reverse
Traditional

p

1.000
0.004
1.000
0.012
0.004
0.012

1.000
0.256
1.000
0.151
0.256
0.151

0.349
1.000
0.349
1.000
1.000
1.000

1.000
0.098
1.000
0.047
0.098
0.047

95% Conﬁdence Interval

Lower

−3.7037
2.1340
−5.9233
1.2040
−13.0532
−11.7636

−35.1329
−74.1885
−41.7880
−76.0796
−13.0567
−8.2926

−21.0515
−18.7081
−4.6629
−10.0336
−10.4577
−18.1717

−32.7898
−78.3655
−40.6065
−80.9032
−4.8821
0.3970

Upper

5.9233
13.0532
3.7037
11.7636
−2.1340
−1.2040

41.7880
13.0567
35.1329
8.2926
74.1885
76.0796

4.6629
10.4577
21.0515
18.1717
18.7081
10.0336

40.6065
4.8821
32.7898
−0.3970
78.3655
80.9032

Reverse training periodization showed a signiﬁcantly higher motivation with train-
ing (9.2 ± 1.1) than traditional (8.0 ± 0.8, p:0.033) and free training (7.4 ± 1.1 p:0.029).
In addition, traditional periodization also showed a signiﬁcantly higher motivation with
training than free training (p:0.041). Regarding the adherence to the training programs,
there were no signiﬁcant differences between groups, since only the free training group
lost one participant, while the reverse and traditional periodization groups maintained the
same number of participants.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 12973

5 of 8

4. Discussion

To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that analysed the effect of three
types of periodization programs (reverse, traditional and free periodization) on adherence,
motivation and cardiovascular and performance variables in physically active recreational
athletes. The main ﬁndings of the present study were: (i) The three types of periodization
maintained the 1000-m running performance; (ii) Reverse training periodization promoted
signiﬁcantly higher motivation than traditional periodization and free training. In addition,
traditional periodization also showed signiﬁcantly higher motivation with training than
free training; and (iii) adherence to the training program was similar in the three types of
training periodization.

It has previously been reported that athletes that followed a structured and pro-
grammed training program had an increase in motivation to the training than unstructured
training [24]. Moreover, periodized training prevents negative mood states associated with
burn out and reduces boredom associated with monotonous training [24]. In addition,
motivation positively inﬂuences adherence to the training, and both have been shown to be
essential to generate a health behaviour and to have an active lifestyle [25]. There are some
reasons that can affect motivation during a training program. First, athletes that performed
periodized training increased their ﬁtness and performance, provoked more body compo-
sition changes and obtained more physiological adaptations than athletes who followed a
free and unstructured training program [26,27]. In this way, a relationship between motiva-
tion and an increase in athletic performance has been shown [28]. However, the results of
the present study only found differences in the cardiovascular adaptations among the three
training programs. The duration of the program (only 8 weeks) can explain the lack of
differences in running performance. Second, reverse periodization is a new type of model
and triathletes did not perform this type of training program previously. This fact can affect
the self-expanding construct in the participants. Interestingly, self-expanding activities are
characterized by novelty, excitement and interest or change [29], and positively inﬂuences
motivation, improves health behaviours [30] and leads to increase effort and persistence in
task [31], which can improve adherence to the program [24]. In this way, self-expansion
occurs naturally but the type of training periodization could promote expansion effects
due to the inclusion of short- and long-term goals, variety, and the promotion of contin-
ued progression of physiological factors and skill-acquisition [24]. Therefore, periodized
methods and speciﬁcally reverse periodization have a strong potential to promote moti-
vation to a greater degree than non-periodized programs. Finally, the characteristic high
intensity training that is used in reverse training periodization, since the beginning of the
training periodization, differs from other periodization models and could promote a higher
hedonic response than monotonous continuous training [32]. This fact could contribute to
increased motivation of athletes and probably the adherence to this program in long-term
sport interventions.

Reverse periodization, unlike previous periodization models, begins the macrocycle
with high-intensity and low-volume training, while gradually decreasing intensity and
increasing volume or, depending on the sport, maintaining intensity and increasing volume
during the following training periods [15]. The main adaptations associated with this type
of periodization (reverse periodization) that provoke an increase of athletic performance
are closely related with the application of high intensity training [16] (e.g., increase sym-
pathetic modulation to achieve different physiological adaptations related with aerobic
performance such as the increase in GLUT4 concentration, the optimization of the muscle
buffering capacity, the increment of the maximal glucose transport activity in skeletal
muscle or the enhancement of the glycogen content [33–36]). Moreover, compared to
moderate continuous training (commonly used in traditional periodization) high intensity
training induces similar-to-greater improvements in ﬁtness and cardiovascular function
but in a shorter amount of time [34]. In addition, previous studies reported [37,38] that
high intensity training is more enjoyable, motivational, and promotes more adherence
to the program than aerobic low/moderate continuous training. In the present study,

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 12973

6 of 8

performance changes and training load were similar in traditional or reverse periodization.
However, taking into consideration the effect of the success of the training program across
lifespan, the motivational results point to reverse periodization as a promising periodiza-
tion for promoting exercise enjoyment, motivation, and adherence in physically active
young adults.

Many guidelines for physical activity and exercise published by international associa-
tions [39] have recommended an increase in cardiovascular ﬁtness, along with maximal
strength and the improvement of body composition, to provide overall health beneﬁts in
the young [40] and elderly population [41], as well as for the improvement of quality of
life in patients with different pathologies [42]. Coaches and physical educators need to
take into consideration affective and motivation responses to training programs to obtain
successful adherence and fulﬁl the recommendations made for improved quality of life.
In this way, and from a practical application point of view, if coaches want to obtain greater
motivation in participants who perform their training program, they may choose to use a
reverse periodization model rather than traditional periodization or free training. On the
other hand, we acknowledge some limitations in the present study. In this way, the main
limitation of the present study was the small sample size analysed, which limited the
generalization of the result. Furthermore, we could not perform a randomized controlled
crossover because of the impossibility of maintaining participants’ participation over a
long time period due to their club training and competition commitments. Additionally,
analysing the psychological proﬁle of participants would improve knowledge of the mo-
tivation response of recreational athletes. Finally, future studies should compare other
types of periodization and identify the mechanism involved in motivation and adherence
to exercise. Furthermore, previous studies found that the providers’ excess weight may
negatively affect patients’ perceptions of their credibility, level of trust, and inclination to
follow medical advice [43]. Moreover, coaches that applied an autocratic coaching style
negatively inﬂuence related psychological factors or affective factors affecting neuroen-
docrine response patterns, self-conﬁdence, and motivational climate [44]. Thus, whether
coaches’ body weight and their coaching style affects athletes’ motivation and adherence
needs to be analysed.

5. Conclusions

The level of adherence to the reverse periodization was signiﬁcantly higher than in
traditional and free training. The number of dropouts in reverse and traditional periodiza-
tion was similar but lower than in the free training. Finally, neither of the periodization
programs improved aerobic performance, and reverse training periodization decreased
heart rate of participants in a 1000 m running test.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, V.J.C.-S.; methodology, V.J.C.-S. and D.J.R.-C.; validation,
all authors; formal analysis, V.J.C.-S., J.A.P. and N.B.; writing—original draft preparation, all authors;
writing—review and editing, all authors; visualization, all authors; supervision, V.J.C.-S. and J.A.P.;
project administration, V.J.C.-S., D.J.R.-C. and J.F.T.-A. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the
Declaration of Helsinki, and approved by the Institutional Review Board (CIPI/002/17).

Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.

Data Availability Statement: All data are in the manuscript.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 12973

7 of 8

References

1.

2.
3.

Goddard, K.; Roberts, C.M.; Byron-Daniel, J.; Woodford, L. Psychological factors involved in adherence to sport injury rehabilita-
tion: A systematic review. Int. Rev. Sport Exerc. Psychol. 2020, 14, 51–73. [CrossRef]
Bull, S.; Stimmel, B.; Veeraraghavan, V.; Dynes, R.; Knox, J. Adherence Issues in Sport and Exercise; Wiley: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2001.
Berger, B.; Pargman, D.; Weinberg, R. Foundations of Exercise Psychology; Fitness Information Technolog: Morgantown, WV, USA,
2002; pp. 53–62.

4. Matsumoto, H.; Takenaka, K. Motivational proﬁles and stages of exercise behavior change. Int. J. Sport Health Sci. 2004, 2, 89–96.

5.

6.

7.

8.

[CrossRef]
Phillips, E.M.; Schneider, J.C.; Mercer, G.R. Motivating elders to initiate and maintain exercise. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 2004, 85,
S52–S57. [CrossRef]
Bachmann, C.; Oesch, P.; Bachmann, S. Recommendations for Improving Adherence to Home-Based Exercise: A Systematic
Review. Phys. Med. Rehabil. Kurortmed. 2018, 28, 20–31. [CrossRef]
Asbjornsen, R.A.; Smedsrod, M.L.; Solberg Nes, L.; Wentzel, J.; Varsi, C.; Hjelmesaeth, J.; van Gemert-Pijnen, J.E. Persuasive
System Design Principles and Behavior Change Techniques to Stimulate Motivation and Adherence in Electronic Health
Interventions to Support Weight Loss Maintenance: Scoping Review. J. Med. Internet Res. 2019, 21, e14265. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Keegan, R.J.; Harwood, C.G.; Spray, C.M.; Lavallee, D.E. A qualitative investigation exploring the motivational climate in
early career sports participants: Coach, parent and peer inﬂuences on sport motivation. Psychol. Sport Exerc. 2009, 10, 361–372.
[CrossRef]

9. Medellín Ruiz, J.P.; Rubio-Arias, J.Á.; Clemente-Suarez, V.J.; Ramos-Campo, D.J. Effectiveness of training prescription guided by
heart rate variability versus predeﬁned training for physiological and aerobic performance improvements: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 8532. [CrossRef]

10. Colquhoun, R.J.; Gai, C.M.; Walters, J.; Brannon, A.R.; Kilpatrick, M.W.; D(cid:48)Agostino, D.P.; Campbell, W.I. Comparison of
powerlifting performance in trained men using traditional and ﬂexible daily undulating periodization. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2017,
31, 283–291. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

11. Rhea, M.R.; Ball, S.D.; Phillips, W.T.; Burkett, L.N. A comparison of linear and daily undulating periodized programs with

equated volume and intensity for strength. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2002, 16, 250–255. [PubMed]

12. Monteiro, A.G.; Aoki, M.S.; Evangelista, A.L.; Alveno, D.A.; Monteiro, G.A.; Picarro Ida, C.; Ugrinowitsch, C. Nonlinear
periodization maximizes strength gains in split resistance training routines. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2009, 23, 1321–1326. [CrossRef]
13. McNamara, J.M.; Stearne, D.J. Flexible nonlinear periodization in a beginner college weight training class. J. Strength Cond. Res.

2010, 24, 17–22. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

14. Clemente-Suárez, V.J.; Fernandes, R.J.; de Jesus, K.; Pelarigo, J.G.; Arroyo-Toledo, J.J.; Vilas-Boas, J.P. Do traditional and reverse
swimming training periodizations lead to similar aerobic performance improvements? J. Sports Med. Phys. Fit. 2018, 58, 761–767.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

15. Clemente-Suarez, V.J.; Ramos-Campo, D.J. Effectiveness of Reverse vs. Traditional Linear Training Periodization in Triathlon. Int.

J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2807. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

16. Gomez Martin, J.P.; Clemente-Suarez, V.J.; Ramos-Campo, D.J. Hematological and Running Performance Modiﬁcation of Trained

Athletes after Reverse vs. Block Training Periodization. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020, 17, 4825. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

17. Clemente-Suárez, V.J.; Dalamitros, A.; Ribeiro, J.; Sousa, A.; Fernandes, R.J.; Vilas-Boas, J.P. The effects of two different swimming
training periodization on physiological parameters at various exercise intensities. Eur. J. Sport Sci. 2017, 17, 425–432. [CrossRef]
18. Clemente-Suárez, V.J.; Fuentes-García, J.P.; Fernandes, R.J.; Vilas-Boas, J.P. Psychological and Physiological Features Associated

19.

with Swimming Performance. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 4561. [CrossRef]
Stockwell, T.B.; McKean, M.R.; Burkett, B.J. Response to Constant and Interval Exercise Protocols in the Elderly. J. Exerc. Physiol.
Online 2012, 15, 3039.

20. Martinez, N.; Kilpatrick, M.W.; Salomon, K.; Jung, M.E.; Little, J.P. Affective and enjoyment responses to high-intensity interval

training in overweight-to-obese and insufﬁciently active adults. J. Sport Exerc. Psychol. 2015, 37, 138–149. [CrossRef]

21. Clemente-Suarez, V.J.; Fernandes, R.J.; Arroyo-Toledo, J.J.; Figueiredo, P.; Gonzalez-Rave, J.M.; Vilas-Boas, J.P. Autonomic

adaptation after traditional and reverse swimming training periodizations. Acta Physiol. Hung. 2015, 102, 105–113. [CrossRef]

22. Manzi, V.; Castagna, C.; Padua, E.; Lombardo, M.; D(cid:48)Ottavio, S.; Massaro, M.; Volterrani, M.; Iellamo, F. Dose-response relationship
of autonomic nervous system responses to individualized training impulse in marathon runners. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ.
Physiol. 2009, 296, H1733–H1740. [CrossRef]

24.

23. Clemente-Suárez, V.J.; Delgado-Moreno, R.; González, B.; Ortega, J.; Ramos-Campo, D.J. Amateur endurance triathletes’
performance is improved independently of volume or intensity based training. Physiol. Behav. 2019, 205, 2–8. [CrossRef]
Strohacker, K.; Fazzino, D.; Breslin, W.L.; Xu, X. The use of periodization in exercise prescriptions for inactive adults: A systematic
review. Prev. Med. Rep. 2015, 2, 385–396. [CrossRef]
Franco, E.; Tejero, J.P.; Arrizabalaga, A. Motivación e intención de ser físicamente activo en jugadores de baloncesto en formación.
Diferencias en función de la competición. Cuad. Psicol. Deporte 2012, 12, 23–25. [CrossRef]

25.

26. Clemente-Suárez, V.J. Periodized training achieves better autonomic modulation and aerobic performance than non-periodized

training. J. Sports Med. Phys. Fit. 2017, 58, 1559–1564. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 12973

8 of 8

27. Williams, T.D.; Tolusso, D.V.; Fedewa, M.V.; Esco, M.R. Comparison of Periodized and Non-Periodized Resistance Training on

Maximal Strength: A Meta-Analysis. Sports Med. 2017, 47, 2083–2100. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

28. Markland, D. Self-determination moderates the effects of perceived competence on intrinsic motivation in an exercise setting.

J. Sport Exerc. Psychol. 1999, 21, 351–361. [CrossRef]

29. Aron, A.; Lewandowski, G.W., Jr.; Mashek, D.; Aron, E.N. The self-expansion model of motivation and cognition in close

relationships. In The Oxford Handbook of Close Relationships; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2013; pp. 90–115.

30. Xu, X.; Floyd, A.H.; Westmaas, J.L.; Aron, A. Self-expansion and smoking abstinence. Addict. Behav. 2010, 35, 295–301. [CrossRef]
31. Mattingly, B.A.; Lewandowski, G.W. The power of one: Beneﬁts of individual self-expansion. J. Posit. Psychol. 2013, 8, 12–22.

[CrossRef]

32. Oliver, M.B.; Bartsch, A. Appreciation as Audience Response: Exploring Entertainment Gratiﬁcations Beyond Hedonism. Hum.

Commun. Res. 2010, 36, 53–81. [CrossRef]

33. Terada, S.; Tabata, I.; Higuchi, M. Effect of high-intensity intermittent swimming training on fatty acid oxidation enzyme activity

in rat skeletal muscle. Jpn. J. Physiol. 2004, 54, 47–52. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

34. Gibala, M.J.; Little, J.P.; van Essen, M.; Wilkin, G.P.; Burgomaster, K.A.; Safdar, A.; Raha, S.; Tarnopolsky, M.A. Short-term sprint
interval versus traditional endurance training: Similar initial adaptations in human skeletal muscle and exercise performance.
J. Physiol. 2006, 575, 901–911. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

35. Banﬁ, G.; Lundby, C.; Robach, P.; Lippi, G. Seasonal variations of haematological parameters in athletes. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol.

2011, 111, 9–16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

36. Clemente-Suárez, V.J.; Arroyo-Toledo, J. Use of biotechnology devices to analyse fatigue process in swimming training. J. Med

Syst. 2017, 41, 94. [CrossRef]

37. Bartlett, J.D.; Close, G.L.; MacLaren, D.P.M.; Gregson, W.; Drust, B.; Morton, J.P. High-intensity interval running is perceived to be
more enjoyable than moderate-intensity continuous exercise: Implications for exercise adherence. J. Sports Sci. 2011, 29, 547–553.
[CrossRef]
Jung, M.E.; Bourne, J.E.; Little, J.P. Where does HIT ﬁt? An examination of the affective response to high-intensity intervals in
comparison to continuous moderate-and continuous vigorous-intensity exercise in the exercise intensity-affect continuum. PLoS
ONE 2014, 9, e114541. [CrossRef]

38.

39. Garber, C.E.; Blissmer, B.; Deschenes, M.R.; Franklin, B.A.; Lamonte, M.J.; Lee, I.M.; Nieman, D.C.; Swain, D.P.; American
College of Sports, M. American College of Sports Medicine position stand. Quantity and quality of exercise for developing and
maintaining cardiorespiratory, musculoskeletal, and neuromotor ﬁtness in apparently healthy adults: Guidance for prescribing
exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2011, 43, 1334–1359. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

40. Pescatello, L.S.; Riebe, D.; Thompson, P.D. ACSM’s Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription; Lippincott Williams & Wilkins:

Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2014.

41. Tiedemann, A.; Sherrington, C.; Close, J.C.; Lord, S.R. Exercise and Sports Science Australia position statement on exercise and

falls prevention in older people. J. Sci. Med. Sport 2011, 14, 489–495. [CrossRef]

42. Ramos-Campo, D.J.; Andreu Caravaca, L.; Martinez-Rodriguez, A.; Rubio-Arias, J.A. Effects of Resistance Circuit-Based Training
on Body Composition, Strength and Cardiorespiratory Fitness: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Biology 2021, 10, 377.
[CrossRef]

43. Puhl, R.M.; Gold, J.A.; Luedicke, J.; DePierre, J.A. The effect of physicians(cid:48) body weight on patient attitudes: Implications for

44.

physician selection, trust and adherence to medical advice. Int. J. Obes. 2013, 37, 1415–1421. [CrossRef]
Jimenez, M.; Fernandez-Navas, M.; Alvero-Cruz, J.R.; Garcia-Romero, J.; Garcia-Coll, V.; Rivilla, I.; Clemente-Suarez, V.J.
Differences in Psychoneuroendocrine Stress Responses of High-Level Swimmers Depending on Autocratic and Democratic
Coaching Style. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 5089. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
