---
pmid: 35244801
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/35244801
title: Internal Training Load Perceived by Athletes and Planned by Coaches - A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
---

Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35  
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40798-022-00420-3

SYSTEMATIC REVIEW

Open Access

Internal Training Load Perceived by Athletes 
and Planned by Coaches: A Systematic Review 
and Meta-Analysis
Allan Inoue1,2,3* 
Elirez Bezerra da Silva1,2 

, Priscila dos Santos Bunn2,3 

, Everton Crivoi do Carmo4 

, Eduardo Lattari5 

 and 

Abstract 
Background:  Rating of perceived exertion (RPE) and session RPE (sRPE) has been widely used to verify the internal 
load in athletes. Understanding the agreement between the training load prescribed by coaches and that perceived 
by athletes is a topic of great interest in sport science.

Objective:  This systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to investigate differences between the training/competi-
tion load perceived by athletes and prescribed/intended/observed by coaches.

Methods:  A literature search (September 2020 and updated in November 2021) was conducted using PubMed, Web 
of Science, Embase, and SPORTDiscus databases. The protocol was registered in the Open Science Framework (osf.
io/wna4x). Studies should include athletes and coaches of any sex, age, or level of experience. The studies should 
present outcomes related to the RPE or sRPE for any scale considering overall training/competition sessions (physical, 
strength, tactical, technical, games) and/or classified into three effort categories: easy, moderate, and hard.

Results:  Twenty-seven studies were included in the meta-analysis. No difference was found between coaches and 
 0.75). There was a difference for easy 
athletes for overall RPE (SMD 
RPE (SMD 
 0.04). No differ-
ences were found for moderate RPE (SMD 
found for moderate (SMD 

 0.05, P 
 0.54, moderate effect size, P 
 0.41, P 

 0.10) and overall sRPE (SMD 
 0.04) and easy sRPE (SMD 

 0.19, P 
 0.44, small effect size, P 

 0.05, P 
 0.56) and hard (SMD 

=
 0.74) and hard RPE (SMD 

 0.18). No difference was 

=
 0.43) sRPE.

 -0.15, P 

 0.20, P 

=
−

=
=

=

=

=

=

=

=

−

=

=

=

=

=

Conclusion:  There is an agreement between coaches and athletes about overall RPE and sRPE, and RPE and sRPE 
into two effort categories (moderate and hard). However, there were disagreements in RPE and sRPE for easy effort 
category. Thus, despite a small disagreement, the use of these tools seems to be adequate for training monitoring.

Keywords:  Internal training load, External training load, Rating of perceived exertion, Session rating of perceived 
exertion

Key Points

•  The session rating of perceived exertion (sRPE) may 
be used to indicate the internal training load in sev-
eral sports.

•  The  ratings  of  perceived  exertion  (RPE)  and  sRPE 
in  easy  sessions  prescribed/intended/observed  by 
coaches may underestimate athletes’ RPE/sRPE.

*Correspondence:  allan_inoue@hotmail.com
1 Exercise and Sport Sciences Postgraduate Program, Rio de Janeiro State 
University, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

© The Author(s) 2022. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which 
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the 
original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or 
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory 
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this 
licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.

 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 2 of 32

•  The RPE and sRPE may guide coaches’ and sport sci-
entists’ decision-making in training programming in 
several sports.

Introduction
Several  studies  have  shown  the  importance  of  training 
load monitoring in various sports modalities [1–3]. High 
training  loads  without  adequate  recovery  may  trigger 
unwanted adaptations and negative results, whereas loads 
with insufficient duration and intensities may not gener-
ate  necessary  adaptations  to  improve  physical  perfor-
mance  [4,  5].  In  this  sense,  precise  training  load  control 
and manipulation are required [6]. Traditionally, training 
load has been measured by power, velocity, acceleration, 
movement  repetition  count,  and  global  positioning  sys-
tem (GPS) parameters [6]. This way of measuring the ath-
letes’ training load has been called external load. In turn, 
the  emerging  literature  has  measured  the  physiological 
stress imposed on the athlete during training or competi-
tions,  defined  as  internal  load.  Heart  rate,  blood  lactate, 
oxygen consumption, rating of perceived exertion (RPE), 
and session RPE (sRPE) have been widely used to verify 
the internal load in athletes [7].

The use of technological tools to control training load 
(heart  rate  monitors,  GPS,  smartphone  apps,  etc.)  is  a 
reality  of  contemporary  training  monitoring.  However, 
the large amount of information can become a real prob-
lem for coaches’ analysis. Additionally, using these equip-
ments  involves  a  cost  that  varies  widely  from  hundreds 
to  thousands  of  dollars  [8].  These  values  increase  when 
we  need  to  monitor  many  athletes  simultaneously.  Fos-
ter et al. [9] recommend keeping it simple, which may be 
the  most  crucial  element  of  training  monitoring.  Thus, 
the  use  of  RPE  and  sRPE  is  considered  an  easy-to-use, 
non-invasive,  accessible,  valid,  and  reliable  method  for 
coaches  to  assess  the  training  load  applied  to  athletes 
daily,  improving  the  control  of  training  variables  [2, 
10–13].

The  sRPE  method  uses  an  objective  measure  of  train-
ing  load  (time)  interacting  with  a  subjective  one  (RPE), 
thus giving a training load index in arbitrary units (a.u.) 
[2,  14]  extensively  accepted  as  a  marker  of  the  internal 
training  load  [13].  In  addition,  the  sRPE  has  been  used 
to  assess  the  agreement  between  coach  and  athlete  for 
load planned and perceived [5]. Previous studies [15, 16] 
have  shown  good  agreement  between  coaches  and  ath-
letes. For instance, Redkva et al. [16] found no differences 
when comparing the sRPE prescribed by the coaches and 
perceived by the athletes in physical, technical, and tacti-
cal training sessions during the three weeks of pre-season 
in soccer players. However, some studies [5, 17–19] have 
reported a difference between the training load planned 

by coaches and the load perceived by athletes. In general, 
these  disagreements  between  coaches  and  athletes  were 
identified  in  the  prescribed  training  as  easy  or  hard  [5, 
17–19].  Besides,  Rabelo  et  al.  [20]  demonstrated  that  in 
all three effort categories (easy, moderate, and hard), the 
athletes perceived a lower training load than intended by 
the coach. Foster et al. [17], based on empirical observa-
tions,  suggest  that  this  lack  of  correspondence  between 
the  program  planned  by  the  coach  and  that  carried  out 
by the athletes is a potential cause of the high incidence 
of  negative  results  in  sports  training.  In  this  scenario, 
incorrect  interpretation  of  sRPE  data  can  lead  to  errors 
in  the  control  and  subsequent  planning  of  training.  The 
training  program  is  prescribed  to  balance  overload  and 
recovery [2], determining the positive or negative adapta-
tion  of  the  training  stimulus.  It  is  known  that  too  low  a 
training load can result in detraining status [21]. On the 
other  hand,  too  high  a  training  load  and  poor  recovery 
can result in overtraining syndrome [4, 22] and develop-
ing overuse injuries [23]. Therefore, the balance between 
training  load  and  recovery  represents  a  significant  chal-
lenge for coaches and athletes.

We  acknowledge  that  recent  studies  investigated  the 
internal  load  in  several  sports  (for  reviews,  see  [3,  6]). 
However,  no  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  were 
performed  to  elucidate  and  summarize  the  differences 
between  the  internal  load  perceived  by  the  athletes  and 
that  planned/intended/observed  by  the  coaches.  Giv-
ing  daily  control  with  feedback  to  coaches  is  the  key  to 
improving physical performance and decreasing the risk 
of injuries and harmful effects of training. An example is 
manipulating the future training load to re-align with the 
planned load [20]. Coaches should be aware that athletes 
could  interpret  the  same  training  differently.  A  simple 
and  subjective  method  to  quantify  the  internal  load  of 
the designed and executed training programs could serve 
as a tool to optimize the training process [9, 13]. There-
fore,  this  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  of  the  lit-
erature aimed to investigate whether there are differences 
between the training load perceived by athletes and that 
prescribed/intended/observed  by  coaches.  We  hypothe-
sized that significant differences would be found between 
that expected by coaches and that perceived by the ath-
letes [5, 17–19].

Methods
Protocol and Registration

This  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  was  written 
according  to  the  Preferred  Reporting  Items  for  System-
atic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) [24]. The pro-
tocol  was  registered  in  the  Open  Science  Framework  in 

Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 3 of 32

September 2020, with storage in Australia-Sydney (Avail-
able at: osf.io/wna4x).

the  third  researcher  (ES)  decided  whether  to  include  or 
exclude the study.

Search Strategy

Data Extraction

A systematic literature search was conducted in Septem-
ber 2020 and updated in November 2021. The following 
databases were used: PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, 
and SPORTDiscus. The following descriptors were used: 
“SRPE,”  OR  “Session  rating  of  perceived  exertion,”  OR 
“Session RPE,” OR “Session-RPE,” OR “Training dose,” OR 
“Ratings  of  perceived  exertion,”  OR  “Training  load,”  OR 
“Training  loads,”  OR  “Internal  load,”  OR  “Internal  train-
ing load,” OR “External load,” OR “External training load,” 
AND  “Coaches,”  OR  “Coach,”  OR  “Mismatch  between 
coaches-players  perceptions,”  OR  “Coaches-players  per-
ceptions,”  OR  “Discrepancy  between  coach-athlete  per-
ceptions,” OR “Comparison of athlete-coach perceptions,” 
OR  “Impaired  player-coach  perceptions,”  OR  “Relation-
ship between coach-athlete perceptions.” In addition, the 
reference  lists  were  explored  to  find  additional  relevant 
studies. No filters were applied in the search as a limita-
tion of time and language.

Eligibility Criteria

Eligibility criteria for study inclusion consisted of one of 
the following: (a) Population: athletes and coaches of any 
sport  (individual  or  team),  sex,  age,  or  experience  level; 
(b)  Comparison:  between  the  training/competition  (all 
season  periods)  load  prescribed/intended/observed  by 
the  coaches  and  that  performed/reported/perceived  by 
the athletes; (c) Outcome: RPE or sRPE for any scale con-
sidering  overall  training/competition  sessions  (physical, 
strength, tactical, technical, games) and/or classified into 
three  effort  categories:  easy,  moderate  and  hard.  These 
three  effort  categories  were  adopted  because  they  are 
the  three  intensity  zones  typically  used  in  the  literature 
related to the comparison of RPE/sRPE between coaches 
and  athletes  [5,  17–20,  25–34];  (d)  Study  design:  cross-
sectional  studies  published  in  peer-reviewed  journals. 
Conference  abstracts,  dissertations,  theses,  book  chap-
ters,  and  articles  published  in  non-peer-reviewed  jour-
nals were not included.

Study Selection

Study  eligibility  assessments  were  performed  indepen-
dently  by  two  reviewers  (AI  and  PB).  First,  studies  were 
downloaded  from  EndNote  (version  X9.0,  Clarivate 
Analytics,  Philadelphia,  PA,  USA),  and  duplicates  were 
removed before being selected by title and abstract. Then, 
the full texts of the remaining studies were retrieved and 
evaluated  for  eligibility.  Any  disagreements  regarding 
the inclusion of a particular study were resolved through 
a  consensus  meeting.  When  there  was  no  consensus, 

The following data were extracted from the articles: par-
ticipant  characteristics,  sample  size,  training  level,  type 
of sports, the scale used, intensity zones, number of ses-
sions/training  duration,  number  of  coaches,  coaches’ 
experience time, number of athletes, and results. Impor-
tantly, data extraction from the selected studies was pro-
cessed  independently  by  two  researchers  (AI  and  PB). 
Differences  were  resolved  through  a  consensus  meet-
ing  or  a  third  reviewer  (ES)  decision.  When  the  data  to 
be extracted were not found, the principal authors were 
contacted.  When  no  response  was  obtained  from  the 
principal  authors,  the  data  imputation  technique  using 
the  Kinovea  0.8.15  software  was  used  to  extract  data 
reported in figures.

Assessment of Methodological Quality

To  assess  the  methodological  quality  of  the  included 
studies, we used the Quality Assessment Tools for Obser-
vational  Cohort  and  Cross-Sectional  Studies  (Available 
in:  https:// www. nhlbi. nih. gov/ health- topics/ study- quali 
ty- asses sment- tools).  Reviewers  answered  each  question 
as  “Yes,”  “No,”  “Cannot  determine,”  “Not  applicable,”  or 
“Not reported,” based on the critical review of each study. 
Questions  answered  with  “Yes”  received  a  score  of  1, 
while questions answered with “No,” “Cannot determine,” 
or  “Not  reported”  received  a  score  of  0.  The  total  score 
for  each  study  was  used  to  rank  the  risk  of  bias  as  low 
(6–8), moderate (3–5), or high (0–2). The methodological 
quality assessment was performed independently by two 
experienced  evaluators  (AI  and  PB).  Any  disagreements 
were  resolved  through  a  consensus  meeting  or  a  third 
reviewer (ES) decision.

Certainty of Evidence

Two  evaluators  (AI  and  PB)  independently  assessed 
the  certainty  of  evidence  using  the  Grading  of  Recom-
mendations  Assessment,  Development  and  Evaluation 
(GRADE) approach [35] through the GRADE PRO web-
site  (https:// grade pro. org).  GRADE  specifies  four  cat-
egories:  high,  moderate,  low,  and  very  low,  applied  to  a 
body of evidence [35]. The observational studies included 
in  this  review  started  with  low  certainty  of  evidence. 
Five  aspects  can  decrease  the  certainty  of  evidence  (a) 
risk  of  bias  (decreased  if  more  than  25%  of  participants 
were from studies with a moderate or high risk of bias); 
(b)  inconsistency  of  results  (decreased  if  heterogene-
ity  I2 > 50%);  (c)  indirect  evidence  (decreased  if  the  out-
comes  evaluated  are  not  those  of  primary  interest);  (d) 
imprecision (decreased if less than 140 participants were 

 Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 4 of 32

included in the comparison) and (e) other (e.g., publica-
tion  bias).  Three  aspects  can  increase  the  certainty  of 
evidence (a) effect size (increased if large effect size), (b) 
dose–response  gradient  (increased  if  study  effect  size 
increases due to an increase in an independent variable), 
and (c) confounding factors (increased if the main poten-
tial  confounding  variables  were  measured  and  adjusted 
statistically).  For  each  aspect  that  met  the  criterion,  the 
certainty was increased by one level. If the criterion was 
not  satisfied,  the  certainty  was  decreased  by  one  level 
[35]. Any disagreements were resolved through a consen-
sus meeting or a third reviewer (ES) decision.

Statistical Analysis

A  meta-analysis  was  performed  through  the  Review 
Manager  software  (RevMan  Version  5.4;  the  Nordic 
Cochrane  Centre,  Copenhagen:  Cochrane  Collabora-
tion).  Each    standardized  mean  difference  (SMD)  was 
weighted according to the inverse variance method. The 
SMD values in each trial were pooled with a random (if 
heterogeneity  was  significant)  or  fixed-effects  model  (if 
heterogeneity  was  by  chance).  SMD  values  of  0.2,  0.5, 
and 0.8 represent small, moderate and large effect sizes, 
respectively  [36].  Heterogeneity  between  studies  was 
assessed using  I2 statistics.  I2 values between 0–50% rep-
resent low heterogeneity, between 50 and 74% moderate 
heterogeneity and ≥ 75% high heterogeneity [37]. Funnel 
plots and Egger’s regression analysis were also performed 
using StatsDirect software (Version 3). They were used to 
assess publication bias. Statistical significance was set at 
5% (P ≤ 0.05).

Results
Selection of Studies

The results identified a total of 5,388 articles. Four addi-
tional  records  were  identified  through  direct  citation 
search  and  manual  verification  of  article  reference  lists. 
After  removing  duplicate  reports  (n = 887),  a  total  of 
4505 articles remained. A summary of the search results 
and  reasons  for  exclusion  are  shown  in  Fig.  1.  Twenty-
nine studies were included in this systematic review and 
27 in meta-analysis since two studies failed to report the 
standard  deviation  of  the  coach  rating  of  exertion.  Data 
are summarized in Table 1.

Study Characteristics

This  review  contains  725  participants  (306  men,  163 
women, and 256 unspecified). Of the 29 studies included 
in the review, 12 studies included only male participants 
[5,  15,  16,  20,  29,  31,  38–43],  four  studies  included  only 
female  participants  [44–47],  three  studies  did  not  spec-
ify the sex of the participants [26, 30, 48], and 10 studies 

included  a  combination  of  male  and  female  participants 
[17–19, 27, 28, 31–34, 49].

All  29  studies  recruited  only  athletes.  The  evaluated 
sports  were  swimming  (n = 4),  soccer  (n = 4),  tennis 
(n = 1), middle and long distance running (n = 1), cross-
country  running  (n = 1),  beach  volleyball  (n = 1),  vol-
leyball  (n = 2),  track  and  field  (n = 1),  basketball  (n = 3), 
open-water  swimmers  (n = 1),  karate  (n = 1),  road 
cycling and mountain biking (n = 1), futsal (n = 2), hand-
ball  (n = 1),  paralympic  swimmers  (n = 1),  judo  (n = 1), 
road cycling (n = 1), and combination of different sports 
(n = 2)  including  volleyball,  basketball,  soccer,  hockey, 
netball and rugby union.

The  studies  were  published  between  the  years  1997 
to  2021.  The  number  of  training  sessions  ranged  from 
one  to  3024.  The  number  of  coaches  ranged  from  1  to 
9. Of the 29 studies included in the review, eight studies 
included  two  coaches  [5,  15,  16,  18,  19,  39,  42,  44],  two 
studies  had  three  coaches  [17,  40],  six  studies  included 
four  coaches  [30,  32,  45–48],  one  study  included  five 
coaches  [29],  one  study  included  six  coaches  [49],  and 
two studies included nine coaches [26, 41]. The coaches’ 
experience ranged from ≤ 1 year to > 23 years. Fourteen 
studies did not report the length of experience of coaches 
[15, 17–19, 25, 28, 30, 31, 33, 41, 42, 45, 46, 48].

Differences Between Intensity Zones (Easy, Moderate, 
and Hard)

The  included  studies  used  different  scales  to  catego-
rize  the  intensity  zones  into  easy,  moderate,  and  hard. 
The  most  used  was  the  Borg  CR10  Scale  (n = 22).  How-
ever,  the  Borg  Scale  6  to  20  (n = 6)  and  a  generic  0-to-
10-point  scale  without  images  using  the  Omni  verbal 
cues for adults (OMNI; n = 1) were also used. Moreover, 
different cutoff values were used to classify sessions into 
easy,  moderate,  and  hard.  Considering  the  Borg  CR10 
Scale,  training  sessions  were  classified  as  easy  (RPE < 3), 
moderate  (RPE  3–5),  and  hard  (RPE > 5)  in  nine  studies 
[17–19,  25–27,  29,  31,  33].  In  the  study  by  Scantlebury 
et al. [32], the sessions were classified as easy (RPE 1–2), 
moderate (RPE 3–4), and hard (RPE 5–10). In the study 
by  Figueiredo  et  al.  [15],  the  training  intensity  was  clas-
sified  as  easy  (RPE < 4),  moderate  (RPE  ≥ 4  to  ≤ 7),  and 
hard  (RPE > 7).  Ieno  et  al.  [28]  classified  the  sessions  as 
easy (RPE ≤ 3), moderate (RPE 4–6), and hard (RPE ≥ 7). 
Besides,  a  2-step  cluster  with  log-likelihood  as  the  dis-
tance  measure  and  Schwartz’s  Bayesian  criterion  was 
performed  to  classify  the  training  load  into  easy,  mod-
erate,  and  hard  sessions  based  on  the  Borg  CR10  Scale 
[20].  Using  the  Borg  scale  6  to  20,  Brink  et  al.  [5]  clas-
sified  the  training  sessions  as  easy  (RPE < 13),  moderate 
(RPE  13–14),  and  hard  (RPE > 14).  In  the  study  by  Voet 
et al. [34], the sessions were classified as easy (RPE < 11), 

Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 5 of 32

Fig. 1  Literature search flowchart

 Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 6 of 32

-
h
t
A

=

-
h
t
A
>
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

k
e
e
w

t
s
1

E
P
R

)
e
c
n
e
r
e
ff
d
y
e
k
L
(

l

i

i

s
e
t
e

l

:

k
e
e
w
d
n
2

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

k
e
e
w
d
r
3

=

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

1
d
n
a

l

i

a
c
n
h
c
e
t

s
s
e
n
t
fi

l

a
c
i
s
y
h
p

l

a
n
o
i
s
s
e
f
o
r
p

f

o
s
r
y
5
1
>

(

;

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
2

-
l
a
c
i
t
c
a
t
1

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

s
s
e
n
t
fi

l

a
c
i
s
y
h
P

)
e
c
n
e
i
r

s
e
t
e

l

-
e
p
x
e
g
n
h
c
a
o
c

i

-
h
t
A
>
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

)
e
c
n
e
r
e
ff
d
y
e
k
L
(

l

i

i

s
e
t
e

l

i

i

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
h
t
g
n
e
r
t
S

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

s
n
o
i
s

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

-
h
t
A

=

)
e
c
n
e
r
e
ff
d
y
e
k
L
(

l

i

i

l

i

a
c
n
h
c
e
t
-
l
a
c
i
t
c
a
 T

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

s
e
t
e

l

E
P
R
s

-
h
t
A
>
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

k
e
e
w

t
s
1

:

k
e
e
w
d
n
2

s
e
t
e

l

-
h
t
A

=

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

s
s
e
n
t
fi

l

a
c
i
s
y
h
P

s
e
t
e

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

k
e
e
w
d
r
3

=

-
h
t
A
<
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

i

l

-
r
e
ff
d
e
b
a
b
o
r
P
(

s
e
t
e

l

)
e
c
n
e

i

i

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
h
t
g
n
e
r
t
S

-
h
t
A
<
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
<
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(

s
e
t
e

l

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

s
n
o
i
s

i

)
e
c
n
e
r
e
ff
d
e
b
a
b
o
r
P
(

l

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

-
h
t
A

=

l

i

a
c
n
h
c
e
t
-
l
a
c
i
t
c
a
 T

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

s
e
t
e

l

E
P
R

h
c
a
o
c
1

5
–
3

.

d
o
M

5
>
d
r
a
H

3
<
y
s
a
E

0
1
R
C

E
P
R

0
1
R
C

l
l

a
r
e
v
O

;

s
k
e
e
w
3

E
P
R
s
d
n
a
E
P
R

-
l
o
V
h
c
a
e
B

l
l

a
b
y
e

l

3
/
3
/
0

n
a

i
l
i
z
a
r
B
(
e
t
i
l

E

,
t
i
u
c
r
i
C
n
e
p
O

d
l
r
o
W

0
6

.

±

.

0
9
7

0
1

±

0
8
1

2
2

.

±

.

2
3
2

.
l

a
t
e
e
d
a
r
d
n
A

]
4
4
[

,

y
s
a
e
r
o

f
E
P
R

;

s
n
o
i
s

d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

s
e
n
o
z
d
r
a
h

i

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
4
3

i

)

.

%
9
5
(
2

;

s
n
o
i
s

)

.

%
6
7
6
(
3
2

,

y
s
a
e

9
d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

-
s
e
s
d
r
a
h

)

.

%
5
6
2
(

i

s
p
h
s
n
o
p
m
a
h
C

i

i

c
p
m
y
O
d
n
a

l

)
s
e
m
a
G

l
l

a
b
y
e

l
l

o
V

5
1
/
0
/
5
1

t
s
r
fi
n
a

i
l
i
z
a
r
B
(

l

a
n
o
i
s
s
e
f
o
r
P

n
o
i
s
i
v
d

i

)
e
u
g
a
e

l

.

1
1
1

±

.

6
4
8

7
9

.

±

.

3
9
8
1

8
2

.

±

4
2

e
d
a
r
d
n
A

a
r
i
e
u
g
o
N

]
5
2
[

.
l

a
t
e

r
o
/
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c

s
e
n
o
z
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

s
c
i
r
t
e
m
d
n
a

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

d
n
a
e
l
a
c
S

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

t
r
o
p
s
f
o
e
p
y
T

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
d
u
t
S

i

s
e
d
u
t
s
d
e
d
u
c
n

l

i

e
h
t

f

o
y
r
a
m
m
u
S

1
e
l
b
a
T

T
/
F
/
M

l

e
v
e
l
/
s
u
t
a
t
S

s
s
a
m
y
d
o
B

)

m
c
(
e
r
u
t
a
t
S

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

)
g
k
(

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 7 of 32

F

=

M

=

h
c
a
o
C

;
)
1
0
0
0

.

P
(

)
8
3
0

.

P
(
e
t
e
h
t
a

l

=

=

=

h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

;
)
1
9
0

.

P
(
e
t
e
h
t
a

l

l

e
t
e
h
t
a
F
>
h
c
a
o
C

F
d
n
a

.

,
)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(
e
t
e
h
t
a

l

M
<
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

.

)
1
0
0
0
<
P
(
e
t
e
h
t
a

l

l

e
t
e
h
t
a
M
<
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

)
6
0
0
0

.

=

E
P
R
s

P
(

F

=

M

=

h
c
a
o
C

;
)
2
0
0
0

.

P
(

)
1
6
0

.

P
(
e
t
e
h
t
a

l

=

=

=

h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

;
)
8
6
0

.

P
(
e
t
e
h
t
a

l

l

e
t
e
h
t
a
F
>
h
c
a
o
C

)
8
0
0
0

.

=

P
(

.

)
1
0
0
0
<
P
(
e
t
e
h
t
a

l

l

e
t
e
h
t
a
M
<
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

F
d
n
a

.

,
)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(
e
t
e
h
t
a

l

M
<
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

E
P
R

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
2

5
–
3

.

d
o
M

5
>
d
r
a
H

3
<
y
s
a
E

0
1
R
C

E
P
R

i

s
y
a
d
g
n
n
a
r
t
0
1
1

i

,

y
s
a
e
)

%
2
6
(
5
7
8
1

;

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
4
2
0
3
(

-
r
e
d
o
m

)

%
8
1
(
4
4
5

)

%
0
2
(
5
0
6
d
n
a
e
t
a

;
)
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
d
r
a
h

E
P
R
s
d
n
a
E
P
R

,

y
s
a
e

,
l
l

a
r
e
v
o
r
o

f

d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

s
e
n
o
z
d
r
a
h

s
r
e
n
n
u
r

y
r
t
n
u
o
c
-
s
s
o
r
C

5
2
/
2
1
/
3
1

i

d
e
n
a
r
t
y
h
g
H

l

i

:

F

;

1
7

.

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

r
o
/
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c

s
e
n
o
z
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

s
c
i
r
t
e
m
d
n
a

T
/
F
/
M

l

e
v
e
l
/
s
u
t
a
t
S

s
s
a
m
y
d
o
B

)

m
c
(
e
r
u
t
a
t
S

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

d
n
a
e
l
a
c
S

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

t
r
o
p
s
f
o
e
p
y
T

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
e
l
b
a
T

±

0
6

.

±

.

9
3
5

)
g
k
(

.

9
7
6

:

M

:

F

;

8
7

.

.

6
6
7
1

:

M

±

5
6

.

±

.

4
8
6
1

:

F

;

4
1

.

6
1

.

±

±

.

2
0
2

.

7
9
1

:

M

.
l

a
t
e
s
e
n
r
a
B

]
9
1
[

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 8 of 32

s
r
a
e
y
2
1
–
1
1
e
g
n
a
r
(
E
P
R

)
d
o

l

;

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
9

:

s
r
y
2
1
–
1
1

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
d
n
a
y
s
a
E

s
r
y
9
1

.

.

2
3
1

s
e
h
c
a
o
C
>
s
e
t
e
h
t
A
r
o

l

f

-
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
f

o

±

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(

s
e
h
c
a
o
C
<
s
e
t
e

l

s
r
y
4
1
–
3
1
e
g
n
a
r
(
E
P
R

-
h
t
A
r
o

f

d
r
a
H

)
d
o

l

;

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

:

s
r
y
4
1
–
3
1

s
r
y
7
1

.

.

1
2
1

-
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
f

o

±

s
e
h
c
a
o
C
>
s
e
t
e
h
t
A
r
o

l

f

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(

;

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

:

s
r
y
6
1
–
5
1

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
d
n
a
y
s
a
E

i

g
n
h
c
a
o
c
e
v
i
t

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(

i

g
n
h
c
a
o
c
e
v
i
t

-
h
t
A
r
o

f

d
r
a
H

s
r
y
7
2

.

.

5
4
1

-
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
f

o

±

5
–
3

.

d
o
M

5
>
d
r
a
H

3
<
y
s
a
E

0
1
R
C

E
P
R

,

y
s
a
e
n
R
N

;

s
n
o
i
s

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
n
R
N

d
r
a
h
n
R
N
d
n
a

r
o

f
E
P
R

;

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
y
s
a
e

,

s
e
n
o
z
d
r
a
h
d
n
a

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
9

i

i

)
3
3
0
0

.

=

)
5
0
0
0

.

P
(

=

P
(

m
0
0
2

m
0
0
4

×

×

5
d
n
a

0
1
(

)
e
c
n
e
i
r

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

-
e
p
x
e
g
n
h
c
a
o
c

i

E
P
R

l
l

a
r
e
v
O

;

s
n
o
i
s

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(

s
e
h
c
a
o
C
<
s
e
t
e

l

6
1
–
5
1
e
g
n
a
r
(
E
P
R

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
d
n
a
y
s
a
E

l

)
d
o
s
r
y

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

=

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
r
o

f

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(

s
e
h
c
a
o
C
<
s
e
t
e

l

:

l

d
o
s
r
y
2
1
–
1
1
e
g
n
a
R

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

-
h
t
A
r
o

f

d
r
a
H

.

)
1
0
0
0
<
P
(
1
3
0

.

:

:

l

d
o
s
r
y
4
1
–
3
1
e
g
n
a
R

.

)
1
0
0
0
<
P
(
1
5
0

.

l

d
o
s
r
y
6
1
–
5
1
e
g
n
a
R

.

)
1
0
0
0
<
P
(
4
7
0

.

=

=

r

r

r

=

E
P
R

i

g
n
h
c
a
o
c
e
v
i
t

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

s
r
y
7
(

h
c
a
o
c
1

0
1
R
C

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
4

i

i

i

g
n
m
m
w
S

i

8
5

.

±

.

1
0
6

1
6

.

±

.

6
9
6
1

6
0

.

±

.

4
5
1

3
1
/
0
/
3
1

l

y
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

d
e
n
a
r
t

i

3
8

.

±

.

1
4
7

6

±

8
7
1

1
1

.

±

.

1
1
2

.
l

a
t
e
o
s
o
r
r
a
B

]
8
3
[

l

e
v
e

l

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N

;

4
2

.

.

8
8
3

;

5
4

,

.

7
6
4
1

;

4
0

.

.

2
1
1

]
6
2
[

±

:

s
r
y
4
1
–
3
1

±

:

s
r
y
6
1
–
5
1

;

4
5

.

.

6
9
4

;

9
6

.

.

4
8
5
1

;

5
0

.

.

4
3
1

±

:

s
r
y
6
1
–
5
1

±

:

s
r
y
6
1
–
5
1

±

:

s
r
y
4
1
–
3
1

±

:

s
r
y
4
1
–
3
1

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

r
o
/
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c

s
e
n
o
z
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

s
c
i
r
t
e
m
d
n
a

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

d
n
a
e
l
a
c
S

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

t
r
o
p
s
f
o
e
p
y
T

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
e
l
b
a
T

i

g
n
m
m
w
S

i

T
/
F
/
M

l

e
v
e
l
/
s
u
t
a
t
S

s
s
a
m
y
d
o
B

)

m
c
(
e
r
u
t
a
t
S

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

)
g
k
(

0
6
1
/
R
N
/
R
N

d
n
a
e
t
a
t
S

,
l

a
c
o
L

:

s
r
y
2
1
–
1
1

:

s
r
y
2
1
–
1
1

:

s
r
y
2
1
–
1
1

.
l

a
t
e
o
s
o
r
r
a
B

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 9 of 32

.

)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(
4
2
0

.

r

:

s
e
t
e

l

.

)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(
1
4
0

.

r

:

s
e
t
e

l

-
h
t
A
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
E
P
R
s

=

=

9
4
0

.

=

r

:

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
d
n
a

)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(

.

s
e
h
c
a
o
C
n
o
i
t
a
r
u
D

-
h
t
A
<
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

-
h
t
A
<
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(

.

s
e
t
e

l

E
P
R

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
<
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(

.

s
e
t
e

l

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(

.

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(

.

E
P
R
s

-
h
t
A
<
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

-
h
t
A
<
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(

.

s
e
t
e

l

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
<
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(

.

s
e
t
e

l

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(

.

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(

.

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
D

-
h
t
A

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

s
e
t
e

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

-
h
t
A
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
E
P
R

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(

.

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

s
r
y
s
u
o
r
e
m
u
n

(

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
f

o

t
s
e
h
g
h
e
h
t

i

t
a

A
A
F
E
U

-

l

e
v
e

l

;

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
2

O
R
P
d
n
a

)
e
s
n
e
c

i
l

l

e
a
c
s
g
r
o
B

0
2
o
t
6

3
1
<
y
s
a
E

E
P
R

i

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
6
4
4
2

i

,

y
s
a
e
n
R
N

;

s
n
o
i
s

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
n
R
N

d
r
a
h
n
R
N
d
n
a

4
1
–
3
1
d
o
M

.

d
n
a
E
P
R

;

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

4
1
>
d
r
a
H

,
l
l

a
r
e
v
o
r
o

f
E
P
R
s

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
y
s
a
e

,

s
e
n
o
z
d
r
a
h
d
n
a

r
o
/
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c

s
e
n
o
z
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

s
c
i
r
t
e
m
d
n
a

T
/
F
/
M

l

e
v
e
l
/
s
u
t
a
t
S

s
s
a
m
y
d
o
B

)

m
c
(
e
r
u
t
a
t
S

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

)
g
k
(

r
e
c
c
o
S

3
3
/
0
/
3
3

l

a
n
o
i
s
s
e
f
o
r
P

5
6

.

6
8

.

±

±

.

7
1
6

.

1
1
7

:

7
1
U

:

9
1
U

9
7

.

1
7

.

±

±

.

5
4
7
1

:

7
1
U

.

3
8
7
1

:

9
1
U

9
1
U

;

7
1
U

]
5
[

.
l

a
t
e
k
n
i
r
B

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

d
n
a
e
l
a
c
S

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

t
r
o
p
s
f
o
e
p
y
T

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
e
l
b
a
T

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 10 of 32

-
h
t
A
>
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

.

)
1
0
0
0
<
P
(

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

.

)
1
0
0
0
<
P
(

s
e
t
e

l

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
1
0
0
0
<
P
(

-
h
t
A
<
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

.

)
1
0
0
0
<
P
(

s
e
t
e

l

E
P
R

’

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
E
O
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

d
n
a
E
O
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

)
9
2
0
0

.

P
(
E
P
R

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

=

5
2
0

.

=

r

:

’

E
P
R
s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

E
P
R

=

)
2
6
0

.

=

E
P
R
s

P
(

=

)
6
8
0

.

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

P
(

:

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
1
0
0
0
<
P
(
4
8
0

.

=

r

)
E
P
R
s
(
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

’

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
d
n
a
E
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

I

3
2

h
c
a
o
c
7
1
U

’

l

E
P
R
s
e
t
e
h
t
A
<
E
O
R

I

d
n
a
E
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

8
1

=

-
s
e
f
o
r
p

f

o
s
r
y

h
c
a
o
c
5
1
U

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

1

;

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(

i

g
n
h
c
a
o
c

l

a
n
o
i
s

E
P
R

1

;

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
2

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(
8
5
0

.

r

:

E
P
R

d
n
a
E
O
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

=

4
6
0

.

=

r

:

’

E
P
R
s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(

i

g
n
h
c
a
o
c

l

a
n
o
i
s

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

)
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

E
P
R

f

o
s
r
y
6
(

h
c
a
o
c
1

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

r
o
/
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c

s
e
n
o
z
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

s
c
i
r
t
e
m
d
n
a

T
/
F
/
M

l

e
v
e
l
/
s
u
t
a
t
S

s
s
a
m
y
d
o
B

)

m
c
(
e
r
u
t
a
t
S

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

)
g
k
(

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

d
n
a
e
l
a
c
S

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

t
r
o
p
s
f
o
e
p
y
T

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
e
l
b
a
T

=

-
s
e
f
o
r
p

f

o
s
r
y

E
O
R
d
n
a
E
R

I

,

E
P
R

=

2
3
5

-
s
e
s
5
4
4

5
1
U

=

7
1
U

;

s
n
o
i
s

l
l

a
r
e
v
O

;

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

l

e
a
c
s
g
r
o
B

0
2
o
t
6

i

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
7
7
9

i

;
)
s
k
e
e
w
8
(

s
n
o
i
s

r
e
c
c
o
S

1
3
/
0
/
1
3

f

o

l

e
v
e

l

t
s
e
h
g
H

i

n

i

n
o
i
t
i
t
e
p
m
o
c

s
d
n
a
l
r
e
h
t
e
N
e
h
t

.

9
2
1

2
5

.

±

±

.

3
6
5

.

8
7
6

:

5
1
U

:

7
1
U

9
4

.

±

.

1
1
1

.

9
9
7
1

±

:

5
1
U

.

1
8
6
1

:

7
1
U

3
0

.

2
0

.

±

.

3
6
1

±

:

7
1
U

.

3
4
1

]
9
3
[

:

5
1
U

.
l

a
t
e
k
n
i
r
B

h
c
a
o
c
d
a
e
h
1

f

o
s
r
y
0
1
>

(

:

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
3

i

g
n
h
c
a
o
c
e
t
i
l

e

1

,
)
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

h
c
a
o
c
t
n
a
t
s
i
s
s
a

h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s
1
d
n
a

-
n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c
d
n
a

h
c
a
o
c
g
n

i

:

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
2

l

i

a
c
n
h
c
e
t
1

d
n
a
h
c
a
o
c

h
c
a
o
c
s
s
e
n
t
fi
1

n
o
i
s
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
1
(

i

i

E
P
R

l
l

a
r
e
v
O

;
)
k
e
e
w

r
e
p

)
y
a
d
r
e
p

E
P
R
s
d
n
a

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

l

e
a
c
s
g
r
o
B

;
)
k
e
e
w
/
s
e
h
c
t
a
m

E
O
R

,

E
P
R

l
l

a
r
e
v
O

.

5
2
(

s
k
e
e
w
6

E
P
R
s
d
n
a

0
2
o
t
6

i

n
h
t
i

w
s
e
h
c
t
a
m
5
1

l
l

a
b
t
e
k
s
a
B

4
1
/
0
/
4
1

e
t
i
l

E

.

2
5
1

±

.

3
0
0
1

1
9

.

±

.

2
7
9
1

8
3

.

±

.

7
6
2

.
l

a
t
e
n
e
v
e
o
D

]
0
4
[

5

,

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
g
n

i

0
1
R
C

i

-
n
a
r
t
5
1
(

s
k
e
e
w
3

r
e
c
c
o
S

6
1
/
0
/
6
1

9
1
U
e
t
i
l

E

5
6

.

±

.

7
8
6

5
5

.

±

.

3
5
7
1

7
0

.

±

.

7
8
1

o
d
e
r
i
e
u
g
F

i

]
5
1
[
.
l

a
t
e

5
–
3

.

d
o
M

5
>
d
r
a
H

3
<
y
s
a
E

0
1
R
C

E
P
R

;
)
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

R
N
d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

n
R
N

,

y
s
a
e
n
R
N

;

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
d
r
a
h
n

,
l
l

a
r
e
v
o
r
o

f
E
P
R

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
y
s
a
e

,

s
e
n
o
z
d
r
a
h
d
n
a

0
2
(

s
k
e
e
w
4

l

d
e
fi
d
n
a
k
c
a
r
T

8
2
/
3
1
/
5
1

l

e
v
e

l

e
t
a
t
S

.

5
1
1

±

.

4
2
5

3
9

.

±

.

7
2
6
1

2
3
1

.

±

.

0
4
1

]
7
2
[

.
l

a
t
e
z
u
r
C

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 11 of 32

5
7
0

.

=

r

:

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

)
5
0
0

.

P
(

l

d
n
a
s
e
t
e
h
t
A
E
P
R
s

4
7
0

.

=

r

:

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

)
5
0
0

.

P
(

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
n
o
i
t
a
r
u
D

≤

≤

5
6
0

.

=

r

:

s
e
h
c
a
o
C
d
n
a

)
5
0
0

.

≤

P
(

-
h
t
A
<
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

E
P
R

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(

s
e
t
e

l

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(

E
P
R
s

-
h
t
A
<
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(

s
e
t
e

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
D

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

d
n
a
s
e
t
e
h
t
A
E
P
R

l

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

l

e
t
e
h
t
a
h
c
a
e
(

l

e
n
o
y
n
o
d
a
h

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
3

)

h
c
a
o
c

5
–
3

.

d
o
M

d
r
a
h
n
R
N
d
n
a
e
t
a

5
>
d
r
a
H

d
n
a
E
P
R

;

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

3
<
y
s
a
E

-
r
e
d
o
m
n
R
N

,

y
s
a
e

s
r
e
n
n
u
r

0
1
R
C

E
P
R

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

s
k
e
e
w
5

d
n
a
e
d
d
M

l

i

n
R
N

;

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d
g
n
o

l

d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

s
e
n
o
z
d
r
a
h

,

y
s
a
e
r
o

f
E
P
R
s

r
o
/
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c

s
e
n
o
z
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

s
c
i
r
t
e
m
d
n
a

T
/
F
/
M

l

e
v
e
l
/
s
u
t
a
t
S

s
s
a
m
y
d
o
B

)

m
c
(
e
r
u
t
a
t
S

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

5
1
/
9
/
6

e
v
i
t
i
t
e
p
m
o
C

)
g
k
(

R
N

R
N

R
N

.
l

a
t
e
r
e
t
s
o
F

]
7
1
[

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

d
n
a
e
l
a
c
S

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

t
r
o
p
s
f
o
e
p
y
T

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
e
l
b
a
T

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 12 of 32

-
h
t
A

=

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

h
c
a
o
C

=

h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

=

)
0
1
1
0

.

=

P
(

k
c
a
b

l

(

s
e
h
c
n
u
p
0
0
0
1

)
t
l
e
b
e
t
i
h
w
d
n
a
t
l
e
b

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
h
c
a
o
C

:
)
t
l
e
b

k
c
a
b

l

(

s
k
c

i

k
0
0
0
1
d
n
a

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

h
c
a
o
C

:
)
t
l
e
b

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

e
t
i
h
w

(

s
k
c

i

k
0
0
0
1

)
9
4
1
0

.

=

P
(

s
e
t
e

l

E
P
R

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
9

-
h
t
A

=

h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

)
3
6
6
0

.

P
(

s
e
t
e

l

3

≤

6
–
4

.

d
o
M

E
P
R

y
s
a
E

;
)
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

-
r
e
d
o
m

)
1
7
(

%
1
4
4

.

,

y
s
a
e
)
0
6
(

.

%
8
7
3
(

E
P
R

h
c
a
o
c
1

0
1
R
C

0
6
1
(

s
k
e
e
w
5

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

r
o
/
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c

s
e
n
o
z
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

s
c
i
r
t
e
m
d
n
a

r
e
t
a
w
-
n
e
p
O

s
r
e
m
m
w
s

i

4
/
2
/
2

7

≥

d
r
a
H

)
9
2
(

.

%
1
8
1
d
n
a
e
t
a

;
)
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
d
r
a
h

,

y
s
a
e
r
o

f

,

E
P
R

l

e
a
c
s
g
r
o
B

0
2
o
t
6

-
r
e
v
O

;
)
s
k
c

i

k
0
0
0
1

0
0
0
1
(

n
o
i
s
s
e
s
1

d
n
a
s
e
h
c
n
u
p

E
P
R

l
l

a

d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

s
e
n
o
z
d
r
a
h

e
t
a
r
a
K

4
1
/
0
/
4
1

T
/
F
/
M

l

e
v
e
l
/
s
u
t
a
t
S

s
s
a
m
y
d
o
B

)

m
c
(
e
r
u
t
a
t
S

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

)
g
k
(

-
i
n
U
a
k
o
u
k
u
F

e
t
a
r
a
K
y
t
i
s
r
e
v

k
c
a
B
(

l

b
u
C

l

n
a
p
a
J

:
t
l
e
b

e
t
a
r
a
K

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N

p
o
t
d
n
a
m
a
e
T

s
r
o
t
i
t
e
p
m
o
c

)

n
a
p
a
J
n

i

)

m
a
e
t

i

c
p
m
y
O

l

(
e
t
i
l

E

3
7

.

±

.

9
9
5

6
4

.

±

.

4
9
6
1

8
0

.

±

.

9
9
1

±

:
t
l
e
b
e
t
i
h
W

±

:
t
l
e
b
e
t
i
h
W

±

:
t
l
e
b
e
t
i
h
W

6
1
6

.

±

5
2
2
6

.

8
6
6

.

±

7
6
1

6
8
4

.

±

5
7
3
2

.

]
8
2
[

.
l

a
t
e
o
n
e

I

:
t
l
e
b
k
c
a
B

l

:
t
l
e
b
k
c
a
B

l

:
t
l
e
b
k
c
a
B

l

.
l

a
t
e
a
r
u
m
a
m

I

9
8

.

.

8
6
6

4
7

.

.

8
1
7
1

5
0

.

.

5
1
2

]
1
4
[

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

d
n
a
e
l
a
c
S

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

t
r
o
p
s
f
o
e
p
y
T

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
e
l
b
a
T

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 13 of 32

-
h
t
A

=

-
h
t
A
<
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

)
6
8
5
0

.

P
(

s
e
t
e

l

=

=

)
3
1
0
0

.

P
(

s
e
t
e

l

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

)
1
5
6
0

.

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

=

P
(

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

=

)
1
5
0
0

.

=

E
P
R
s

P
(

-
h
t
A

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

)
8
3
7
0

.

=

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

P
(

s
e
t
e

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

=

)
3
7
0
0

.

=

P
(

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

)
4
6
6
0

.

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

=

P
(

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

=

)
8
8
3
0

.

P
(

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
D

=

-
h
t
A

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

)
7
1
7
0

.

=

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

P
(

s
e
t
e

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

)
0
8
9
0

.

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

=

P
(

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

=

)
3
9
3
0

.

=

P
(

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

=

)
3
5
8
0

.

=

P
(

.

)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(
3
7
0

.

r

:

s
e
t
e

l

-
h
t
A
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
E
P
R
s

.

)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(
7
8
0

.

r

:

s
e
t
e

l

-
h
t
A
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
E
P
R

=

=

5
9
0

.

=

r

:

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
d
n
a

)
1
0
0
0
0
<
P
(

.

s
e
h
c
a
o
C
n
o
i
t
a
r
u
D

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

s
r
y
1
4

.

.

2
7
(

E
P
R

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
5

i

g
n
h
c
a
o
c
f

o

)
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

±

5
–
3

.

d
o
M

5
>
d
r
a
H

3
<
y
s
a
E

0
1
R
C

E
P
R

;
)
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

-
r
e
d
o
m

)
7
8
(

%
6
9
5

.

)
2
4
(

.

%
8
8
2
d
n
a
e
t
a

E
P
R

;

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
d
r
a
h

-
r
e
v
o
r
o

f
E
P
R
s
d
n
a

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
y
s
a
e

,

,
l
l

a

,

y
s
a
e
)
7
1
(

%
6
1
1

.

s
e
n
o
z
d
r
a
h
d
n
a

6
4
1
(

d
o
i
r
e
p
e
v
i
t

i

g
n
k
B

i

g
n
i
r
u
d
s
k
e
e
w
2

g
n

i
l

c
y
C
d
a
o
R

-
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
e
h
t

i

n
a
t
n
u
o
M
d
n
a

4
1
/
0
/
4
1

d
e
n
a
r
T

i

9
6

.

±

.

1
1
7

7
6

.

±

.

3
7
7
1

9
9

.

±

.

1
3
3

.
l

a
t
e
e
u
o
n

I

]
9
2
[

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

r
o
/
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c

s
e
n
o
z
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

s
c
i
r
t
e
m
d
n
a

T
/
F
/
M

l

e
v
e
l
/
s
u
t
a
t
S

s
s
a
m
y
d
o
B

)

m
c
(
e
r
u
t
a
t
S

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

)
g
k
(

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

d
n
a
e
l
a
c
S

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

t
r
o
p
s
f
o
e
p
y
T

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
e
l
b
a
T

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 14 of 32

’

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

E
O
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
<
E
P
R

≤

)
5
0
0

.

P
(
E
O
R

d
n
a

,

I

E
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
<
E
P
R

’

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

E
P
R

s
e
h
c
a
o
c

d
a
e
h
4

)
5
0
0

.

P
(

4

l

e
a
c
s

i

t
n
o
p
0
1

o
t
0
c
i
r
e
n
e
G

i

n
m
O
e
h
t
g
n
i
s
u

r
o

f

s
e
u
c

l

a
b
r
e
v

s
t
l
u
d
a

≤

7
–
5

.

d
o
M

E
P
R

y
s
a
E

’

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

E
O
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
<
E
P
R

)
5
0
0

.

P
(

E
O
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
>
E
P
R

d
n
a
E
P
R
s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

’

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

≤

)
5
0
0

.

P
(

3
8
0

.

=

d
n
a
E
P
R
s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

’

)
5
0
0

.

P
(

≤

r

:

E
O
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

s
n
o
i
s

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

i

i

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
h
t
g
n
e
r
t
S

-
h
t
A
>
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

i

i

g
n
n
a
r
t
g
n
n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
C

i

5
6
0

.

=

r

:

I

E
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

)
5
0
0

.

≤

E
P
R
s

P
(

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
<
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

s
n
o
i
s

.

)
1
0
0
0
<
P
(

i

i

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
e
u
q
n
h
c
e
 T

i

=

)
1
0
0

.

P
(

s
e
t
e

l

’

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

≤

≤

)
r
e
n
a
r
t

i

l

a
c
i
s
y
h
p

d
n
a
d
a
e
h
1
(

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
4

t
n
a
t
s
i
s
s
a
2

1

,

s
e
h
c
a
o
c

0
1
R
C

8

≥

d
r
a
H

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

r
o
/
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c

s
e
n
o
z
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

s
c
i
r
t
e
m
d
n
a

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

d
n
a
e
l
a
c
S

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

t
r
o
p
s
f
o
e
p
y
T

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
e
l
b
a
T

,

%
8
4
~
y
s
a
e
)
5
9
1
(

%
5
4
~

(

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

)
8
0
2
(

;
)
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
d
r
a
h

)
0
3
(

%
7
~
d
n
a

E
O
R
d
n
a
E
R

I

,

E
P
R

,

y
s
a
e

,
l
l

a
r
e
v
o
r
o

f

d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

s
e
n
o
z
d
r
a
h

E
P
R
s

l
l

a
r
e
v
O

;

s
n
o
i
s

i

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
8
6
2

i

i

i

g
n
n
a
r
t
3
3
4

,
l
l

a
b
y
e

l
l

o
V

,
l
l

a
b
t
e
k
s
a
B

r
e
c
c
o
S
d
n
a

s

m
a
e
t
c
i
t
e
h
t
a

l

T
/
F
/
M

l

e
v
e
l
/
s
u
t
a
t
S

s
s
a
m
y
d
o
B

)

m
c
(
e
r
u
t
a
t
S

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

6
5
/
R
N
/
R
N

e
t
a
g
e

i

l
l

o
c
r
e
t
n

i

n
o
i
s
i
v
D
4

i

)
g
k
(

R
N

R
N

3
2
–
8
1

]
0
3
[

.
l

a
t
e
t
f
a
r
K

l
l

a
b
t
e
k
s
a
B

5
1
/
5
1
/
0

e
t
i
l

E

9

±

2
7

9

±

8
7
1

5
0

.

±

.

7
6
1

.
l

a
t
e
o
p
u
L

]
5
4
[

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

E
P
R

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
2

l

e
a
c
s
g
r
o
B

0
2
o
t
6

;
)
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

E
P
R

l
l

a
r
e
v
O

5
2
2
(

s
k
e
e
w
0
4

l

a
s
t
u
F

2
1
/
0
/
2
1

l

a
n
o
i
s
s
e
f
o
r
P

1
6

.

±

.

9
3
7

9
5

.

±

.

9
5
7
1

1
5

.

±

7
2

.
l

a
t
e
a
n
d
e
M

i

]
2
4
[

:

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(
4
7
0

.

=

E
P
R

r

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(
9
5
0

.

=

r

:

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

)
e
c
n
e
i
r

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

-
e
p
x
e
g
n
h
c
a
o
c

i

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
<
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

s
r
y
3

0
1
(

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(

l

e
v
e
l
-
e
t
i
l

e

±

l
l
i
r
d

,

E
P
R

l

a
c
i
s
y
h
p

5
8
2

,

s
k
e
e
w
6
1
(

l
l
i
r
d

,

E
P
R

;
)
s
l
l
i
r
d

E
P
R

l

a
t
n
e
m

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

±

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
6

0
1
R
C

i

g
n
n
a
r
t
3

i

1
2

s
i
n
n
e
T

4
1
/
6
/
8

i

r
o
n
u

j

e
t
i
l

E

.

2
4
1

±

.

0
0
6

.

8
0
1

±

.

0
7
6
1

2
1

.

±

.

0
5
1

.
l

a
t
e
y
h
p
r
u
M

]
9
4
[

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 15 of 32

:

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

l

a
c
i
t
c
a
 T

i

g
n
h
c
a
o
c
s
r
y
8
(

:

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

l

a
c
i
s
y
h
P

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

1

,
)
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

h
c
a
o
c
s
s
e
n
t
fi

-
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y
0
2
(

)
e
c
n
e

-
i
s
y
h
p

=

-
h
c
e
t

=

=

-
i
t
c
a
t

)

i

n
m
5
0
7
(

%
8
4
d
n
a

l

a
c
n

i

;
)

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

l

a
c

)

i

n
m
0
7
4
(

)

i

n
m
0
9
2
(

%
0
2

,
l

a
c

.

)
3
0
0
0
<
P
(
0
6
0

.

=

r

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

s
n
o
i
s

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

:

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

l

i

a
c
n
h
c
e
 T

l
l

a
r
e
v
O

;

n
o
s
a
e
s
e
r
p

f

o
s
k
e
e
w
3
t
s
r
i
F

E
P
R
s
d
n
a
E
P
R

:

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(
3
9
0

.

=

E
P
R

r

l
l

a
(

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

-
e
r
P
(

s
d
o
i
r
e
p
n
o
s
a
e
s

e
v
i
t
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
t
s
r
fi

,

n
o
s
a
e
s

d
n
o
c
e
s
d
n
a
d
o
i
r
e
p
n
o
i
t

-
i
t
e
p
m
o
c
r
e
t
n

i

,

d
o
i
r
e
p

)

d
o
i
r
e
p
e
v
i
t
i
t
e
p
m
o
c

,

y
s
a
e
(

s
e
n
o
z
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

d
n
a

)
)

d
r
a
h
d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

)
2
0
0
<

.

P
(

=

-
h
t
A

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

E
P
R
s

)
0
7
0

.

P
(

s
e
t
e

l

=

-
h
t
A

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

s
e
t
e

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

E
P
R

h
c
a
o
c
1

5
–
3

.

d
o
M

5
>
d
r
a
H

3
<
y
s
a
E

0
1
R
C

E
P
R

E
P
R
s

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
4

0
1
R
C

i

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
8
1

i

)
2
(

%
1
1
1

.

;

s
n
o
i
s

)
5
1
(

%
3
3
8

.

,

y
s
a
e

d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

,

y
s
a
e

,
l
l

a
r
e
v
o
r
o

f

d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

s
e
n
o
z
d
r
a
h

d
r
a
h

)
1
(

%
6
5

.

E
P
R

;

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

i

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
7
5

i

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

E
P
R
s

l
l

a
r
e
v
O

,

s
n
o
i
s

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

r
o
/
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c

s
e
n
o
z
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

s
c
i
r
t
e
m
d
n
a

i

g
n
m
m
w
S

i

T
/
F
/
M

l

e
v
e
l
/
s
u
t
a
t
S

s
s
a
m
y
d
o
B

)

m
c
(
e
r
u
t
a
t
S

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

)
g
k
(

7
1
/
7
/
0
1

d
n
a
e
t
a
t
S

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N

7
5

.

±

.

7
9
5

3
6

.

±

.

1
0
7
1

7
5
0

.

±

.

2
5
1

a
r
i
e
u
g
o
N

]
1
3
[

.
l

a
t
e

l
l

a
b
d
n
a
H

6
5
/
6
5
/
0

’

-
d
n
a
h
s
n
e
m
o
w

n

i

e
u
g
a
e

l

l
l

a
b

i

n
o
i
s
i
v
d
t
s
r
i
F

s
u
r
p
y
C

h
t
r
o
N

.

0
0
1

±

.

8
2
6

7
6

.

±

.

0
4
6
1

4
5

.

±

.

7
0
2

.
l

a
t
e
n
u
t
y
O

]
6
4
[

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

d
n
a
e
l
a
c
S

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

t
r
o
p
s
f
o
e
p
y
T

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
e
l
b
a
T

o
t

l

r
e
t
s
u
c
p
e
t
s
-
2

n
R
N

,

y
s
a
e
n
R
N

y
f
i
s
s
a
c

l

R
N
d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

,

y
s
a
e

;

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
d
r
a
h
n

s
r
y
3
>

(

h
c
a
o
c
1

)
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

0
1
R
C

E
P
R

;
)
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

7
5
1
(

s
k
e
e
w
5
4

l

a
s
t
u
F

8
1
/
0
/
8
1

l

a
n
o
i
s
s
e
f
o
r
P

6
9

.

±

.

0
7
7

0
1

±

6
7
1

8
3

.

±

.

6
4
2

.
l

a
t
e
o
e
b
a
R

l

]
0
2
[

d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

,

y
s
a
e
r
o

f
E
P
R

:

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
2

l

i

a
c
n
h
c
e
t
1

h
c
a
o
c

s
e
n
o
z
d
r
a
h

d
r
a
h

,

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

-
n
o
s
a
e
s
d
n
a
s
e
n
o
z

0
1
R
C

%
2
3

,

i

n
m
5
6
4
1
(

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
g
n

i

s
d
o
i
r
e
p

i

-
n
a
r
t
2
2

r
e
c
c
o
S

4
2
/
0
/
4
2

l

a
n
o
i
s
s
e
f
o
r
P

2
9

.

±

.

3
8
7

1
6

.

±

.

6
8
7
1

4
3

.

±

.

1
4
2

.
l

a
t
e
a
v
k
d
e
R

]
6
1
[

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 16 of 32

s
t
r
e
p
x
e
(

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

i

)
s
r
e
n
n
g
e
b
d
n
a

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c
t
r
e
p
x
E
E
P
R

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(
0
7
0

.

r

:

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c
t
r
e
p
x
E
E
P
R
s

2
7
0

.

=

r

:

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
d
n
a

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(
5
7
0

.

r

:

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
r
e
n
n
g
e
B
E
P
R
s

i

=

6
7
0

.

=

r

:

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
d
n
a

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
r
e
n
n
g
e
B
E
P
R

i

=

E
P
R
s

-
i
r
e
p
x
e
r
y
1

(

)
e
c
n
e

≤

s
t
r
e
p
x
e
(

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

E
P
R

2
(

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
4

0
1
>

(

s
t
r
e
p
x
e

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

i

)
s
r
e
n
n
g
e
b
d
n
a

,
)
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

i

s
r
e
n
n
g
e
b
2

E
P
R

l
l

a
r
e
v
O

;

g
n

i

E
P
R
s
d
n
a

0
1
R
C

i

-
n
a
r
t

f

o
s
k
e
e
w
5
1

l
l

a
b
y
e

l
l

o
V

2
1
/
2
1
/
0

h
s
i
n
a
p
S
(

m
a
e
t

d
r
i
h
t

l
l

a
b
y
e

l
l

o
v

y
t
i
s
r
e
v
n
U

i

)

n
o
i
s
i
v
d

i

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

r
o
/
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c

s
e
n
o
z
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

s
c
i
r
t
e
m
d
n
a

T
/
F
/
M

l

e
v
e
l
/
s
u
t
a
t
S

s
s
a
m
y
d
o
B

)

m
c
(
e
r
u
t
a
t
S

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

d
n
a
e
l
a
c
S

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

t
r
o
p
s
f
o
e
p
y
T

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
e
l
b
a
T

)
g
k
(

9
4

.

±

.

7
3
6

6
6

.

±

.

5
0
7
1

3

±

1
2

.
l

a
t
e
o
y
o
r
r
a
M

-
s
e
u
g
i
r
d
o
R

]
7
4
[

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 17 of 32

d
n
a

,

I

E
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

=

E
P
R

E
O
R

’

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

i

g
n
h
c
a
o
c
s
r
y
5
>

d
a
h
s
e
h
c
a
o
c

l
l

A

.
)
t
r
o
p
s

:

I

S
E
(
E
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
d
n
a
E
P
R

’

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
n
e
e
w
t
e
b
≠
e
t
a

.

)
5
6
1
o
t
7
0

.

I

C
%
5
9

;

7
1
1

.

’

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
n
e
e
w
t
e
b
≠

l
l

a
m

s

:

I

S
E
(
E
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
d
n
a
E
P
R

E
O
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
d
n
a
)
1
1
0
-

.

6
4
0
-

.

I

C
%
5
9

;

9
2
0
-

.

:

S
E
(

o
t
6
5
0
-

,

I

C
%
5
9

;

6
3
0
-

.

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

.

)
1
1
0
-
o
t

’

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
n
e
e
w
t
e
b
≠

l
l

a
m

s

:

I

S
E
(
E
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
d
n
a
E
P
R

o
t
2
7
0
-

,

I

C
%
5
9

;

6
4
0
-

.

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

n
e
e
w
t
e
b
≠
a
v
i
r
t

l

i

;
)
0
2
0
-

.

;

5
0
0
-

.

:

S
E
(
E
O
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

d
n
a
E
P
R
s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

’

.

)
8
2
1
o
t
4
0

.

I

C
%
5
9

;

3
8
0

.

:

S
E
(
E
O
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
d
n
a

.

)
6
3
0
o
t
4
2
0
-

.

I

C
%
5
9

d
n
a
E
P
R
s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

’

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

h
t
i

w
d
e
k
r
o
w

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

r
y
1
>

r
o

f

d
a
h

:

-
r
e
d
o
m
e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

d
n
a
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

E
P
R

r
e
p
1
(

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
4

%
5
9
(
9
3
0

.

r

:

I

E
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

=

d
n
a
E
P
R
s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

’

.

)
9
4
0
o
t
7
2
0

.

I

C

=

.

)
0
7
0
o
t
4
5
0

.

3
6
0

.

r

:

E
O
R
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

I

C
%
5
9
(

E
P
R
s

h
c
a
o
c
1

-
h
t
A
<
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
<
h
c
a
o
C

)
5
0
0

.

P
(

s
e
t
e

l

≤

-
h
t
A
<
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

)
1
0
0

.

P
(

≤

)
5
0
0

.

≤

P
(

s
e
t
e

l

4
–
3

.

d
o
M

3
<
y
s
a
E

5

≥

d
r
a
H

0
1
R
C

E
P
R

5
–
3

.

d
o
M

5
>
d
r
a
H

3
<
y
s
a
E

0
1
R
C

E
P
R

;

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
d
r
a
h
6
6

E
O
R
d
n
a
E
R

I

,

E
P
R

d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

,

y
s
a
e

,
l
l

a
r
e
v
o
r
o

f

d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

s
e
n
o
z
d
r
a
h

d
n
a

,

n
o
n
u

i

r
e
c
c
o
S

,

y
s
a
e
n
R
N

;

s
n
o
i
s

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
n
R
N

d
r
a
h
n
R
N
d
n
a

r
o

f
E
P
R
s

;

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
y
s
a
e

,

s
e
n
o
z
d
r
a
h
d
n
a

s
r
e
m
m
w
S

i

i

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
6
1

i

i

c
p
m
y
a
r
a
P

l

4
/
3
/
1

l

s
s
a
c
d
l
r
o
W

i

l

c
p
m
y
a
r
a
P
h
s
i
r
I
(

i

g
n
m
m
w
s

i

)

m
a
e
t

8
0

.

±

.

2
7
1

6
7

.

±

.

5
8
4

R
N

4

±

9
1

r
o
n
n
o
C
O

’

]
3
3
[

.
l

a
t
e

-
t
t
o
n
n
S

i

1
7

.

±

.

6
3
7

±

-
c
o
S
5
1
1

.

.

6
3
8

:

i

n
o
n
u
y
b
g
u
R

±

±

:
l
l

a
b
t
e
N

;

2
7

.

.

0
8
5

:

i

n
o
n
u
y
b
g
u
R

;

2
4

.

±

.

8
7
6
1

±

:
l
l

a
b

;

4
5

.

±

:
r
e
c
c
o
S

.

9
9
7

;

6
0

.

±

y
b
g
u
R

.

6
7
1

:

n
o
n
u

i

±

:
l
l

a
b
t
e
N

:
r
e
c

5
0
0

.

±

.

0
4
7
1

4
0

.

±

:
r
e
c
c
o
S

.

2
7
1

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

r
o
/
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c

s
e
n
o
z
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

s
c
i
r
t
e
m
d
n
a

T
/
F
/
M

l

e
v
e
l
/
s
u
t
a
t
S

s
s
a
m
y
d
o
B

)

m
c
(
e
r
u
t
a
t
S

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

)
g
k
(

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

d
n
a
e
l
a
c
S

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

t
r
o
p
s
f
o
e
p
y
T

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
e
l
b
a
T

5
2
1

,

y
s
a
e
8
2

;

s
n
o
i
s

y
b
g
u
R

,
l
l

a
b
t
e
N

l

o
o
h
c
s

;

3
6

.

.

0
0
6

-
t
e
N

;

4
6

.

.

7
4
6
1

;

8
0

.

.

4
7
1

]
2
3
[

.
l

a
t
e

i

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
9
1
2

i

,

y
e
k
c
o
H

7
3
/
7
1
/
0
2

t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n

I

:

y
e
k
c
o
H

:

y
e
k
c
o
H

:

y
e
k
c
o
H

y
r
u
b
e
l
t
n
a
c
S

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 18 of 32

-
h
t
A

=

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

h
c
a
o
C

h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

s
e
t
e

l

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
D

h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

:

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
d
n
a
h
c
a
o
C
E
P
R

:

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
d
n
a
h
c
a
o
C
E
P
R
s

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(
3
7
0

.

=

r

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(
7
8
0

.

=

r

l
l

a
n

i
(

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
<
h
c
a
o
C

1
0
0
0
0
<
P

.

l
l

a

,

s
e
m
a
g

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

5
v
5
m
o
r
f

t
r
a
p
a

8
1
U
d
n
a
6
1
U

)
9
1
0
0
0

.

=

P

)
s
r
e
y
a
p

l

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
<
h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

E
P
R

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(

E
P
R

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

-
h
t
A
>
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

=

)
4
0
0
0

.

P
(

s
e
t
e

l

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

-
h
t
A
>
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

.

)
1
0
0
0
<
P
(

s
e
t
e

l

E
P
R
s

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

h
c
a
o
C

:
l
l

a
r
e
v
O

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

-
h
t
A

=

h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

s
e
t
e

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

h
c
a
o
C

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

I

C
U

t
a
s
t
s
i
l

c
y
c

l

a
t
n
e
n
i
t
n
o
C

i

g
n
h
c
a
o
c
n

i

5
(

h
c
a
o
c
1

)
r
e
h
g
h
r
o

i

,
l

e
v
e

l

r
o

f

s
e
h
c
a
o
c

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
e
h
t

e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s
4

l

e
a
c
s
g
r
o
B

0
2
o
t
6

1
1
<
y
s
a
E

E
P
R

0
1
R
C

;
)
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

-
e
n
o

f

o
s
e
m
a
g
7

6

,
)
1
v
1
(
e
d
i
s
-
a

e
d
i
s
-
a
-
2
f

o
s
e
m
a
g

,
)
5
v
5
(
e
d
i
s
-
a
-
5
f

o

f

o
s
e
m
a
g
5
d
n
a

)
2
v
3
(
y
t
i
r
o
i
r
e
p
u
s

s
e
m
a
g
8

,
)
2
v
2
(

l
l

a
r
e
v
O

;

s
n
o
i
t
a
u
t
i
s

E
P
R

E
P
R

l
l

a
r
e
v
O

;

s
n
o
i
s

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
4

i

i

i

-
s
e
s
g
n
n
a
r
t
7
4
7

i

,

y
s
a
e
n
R
N

;

s
n
o
i
s

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
n
R
N

d
r
a
h
n
R
N
d
n
a

4
1
–
1
1

.

d
o
M

d
n
a
E
P
R

;

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

4
1
>
d
r
a
H

,
l
l

a
r
e
v
o
r
o

f
E
P
R
s

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
y
s
a
e

,

s
e
n
o
z
d
r
a
h
d
n
a

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

d
n
a
e
l
a
c
S

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

t
r
o
p
s
f
o
e
p
y
T

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
e
l
b
a
T

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

r
o
/
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c

s
e
n
o
z
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

s
c
i
r
t
e
m
d
n
a

E
P
R

s
r
y
8
1
(

h
c
a
o
c
1

0
1
R
C

5
1
(

s
k
e
e
w
6

l
l

a
b
t
e
k
s
a
B

2
1
/
0
/
2
1

T
/
F
/
M

l

e
v
e
l
/
s
u
t
a
t
S

s
s
a
m
y
d
o
B

)

m
c
(
e
r
u
t
a
t
S

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

e
u
g
a
e
L

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
n

h
s
i
n
a
p
S
r
o
n
u
J

i

)
g
k
(

R
N

8
5

.

±

.

9
3
8
1

4
0

.

±

6
1

.
l

a
t
e
a
r
e
u
q
a
V

]
3
4
[

o
d
u
J

0
4
/
R
N
/
R
N

m
a
e
t

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
n

n
a

i
l
i
z
a
r
B

g
n

i
l

c
y
C
d
a
o
R

1
1
/
2
/
9

-
s
e
f
o
r
p
-
i

m
e
S

:

F

;

4
4

.

l

s
e
a
m
e
f
2

l

a
n
o
i
s

d
l
r
o
W

(

t
s
i
l

c
y
c

l

e
a
m
1
d
n
a

)

m
a
e
t

r
u
o
T

±

1
1

.

±

.

8
0
6

.

1
9
6

:

M

R
N

:

F

;

3

1
2

±

0

±

:

M

9
1

]
4
3
[

.
l

a
t
e
t
e
o
V

]
8
4
[

R
N

R
N

R
N

.
l

a
t
e
s
o
r
i
e
v
V

i

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 19 of 32

-
h
t
A
<
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A
>
s
e
h
c
a
o
C

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(

s
e
t
e

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

:

e
n
o
z
y
s
a
E

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

.

)
5
0
0
<
P
(

E
P
R
s

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

:

e
n
o
z
d
r
a
H

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

.

)
5
0
0
>
P
(

:

e
n
o
z
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

-
h
t
A
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
E
P
R

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
C

i

g
n
m
m
w
s
d
e
fi

i

i

)
s
r
o
t
c
u
r
t
s
n

i

E
P
R

-
l
a
u
q

(

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
2

-
h
t
A
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
E
P
R
s

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(
4
8
0

.

r

:

s
e
t
e

l

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(
5
8
0

.

r

:

s
e
t
e

l

d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
C
n
o
i
t
a
r
u
D

=

=

.

)
1
0
0
<
P
(
6
8
0

.

=

r

:

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

s
e
n
o
z
d
r
a
h

.

d
o
M

;
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s
d
r
a
h
d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
y
s
a
e
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
n

,

5
>
d
r
a
H

-
r
e
d
o
m
n
R
N

,

y
s
a
e

d
r
a
h
n
R
N
d
n
a
e
t
a

d
n
a
E
P
R

;

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

5
–
3

.

d
o
M

3
<
y
s
a
E

0
1
R
C

E
P
R

n
R
N

;
)
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

l

i

a
u
d
v
d
n

i

i

0
2
(

d
o
i
r
e
p
h
t
n
o
m
-
3

i

g
n
m
m
w
S

i

,

y
s
a
e
r
o

f
E
P
R
s

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
r
y

r
o
/
d
n
a
s
e
h
c
a
o
c

s
e
n
o
z
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

s
c
i
r
t
e
m
d
n
a

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

d
n
a
e
l
a
c
S

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

t
r
o
p
s
f
o
e
p
y
T

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
S

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

1
e
l
b
a
T

T
/
F
/
M

l

e
v
e
l
/
s
u
t
a
t
S

s
s
a
m
y
d
o
B

)

m
c
(
e
r
u
t
a
t
S

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

)
g
k
(

2
1
/
6
/
6

)
l
e
v
e

l

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N

(

i

d
e
n
a
r
t
-
l
l

e
W

.

6
1
1

±

.

8
1
7

0
9

.

±

.

0
5
7
1

1
3

.

±

.

3
2
2

.
l

a
t
e
e
c
a

l
l

a
W

]
8
1
[

n
o
i
s
s
e
s

=

%
5
9

=

E
P
R
s

;

i

n
o
i
t
r
e
x
e
d
e
v
e
c
r
e
p
f
o
s
g
n
i
t
a
r

I

C
%
5
9

;

e
z
i
s

t
c
e
ff
e

S
E

;

e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m

=

=

=

E
P
R

;

l

e
a
c
s
0
1
o
i
t
a
r
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c

=

0
1
R
C

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

;

i

l

e
a
c
s
n
o
i
t
r
e
x
e
d
e
v
e
c
r
e
p
f
o
s
g
n
i
t
a
r
g
r
o
B
0
2
o
t
6

l

e
a
c
s
g
r
o
B
0
2
–
6

;

e
l
a
n
o
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
n

I
e
t
s
i
l
c
y
C
n
o
n
U

i

;
r
e
d
n
u

U

;
l

a
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
c
n
e
d
fi
n
o
c

n

;

e
c
n
e
r
e
ff
d

i

;

≠
n
a
h
t
-
s
s
e

l

<

;

n
a
h
t
-
r
e
t
a
e
r
g

>

;
l

a
t
o
t

T

;
s
r
a
e
y

s
r
y

l

;
s
e
a
m
e
f

F

l

;
s
e
a
m

M

;

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

R
N

=

s
e
h
c
a
o
c
y
b
n
o
i
t
r
e
x
e
d
e
v
r
e
s
b
o
f
o
s
g
n
i
t
a
r

E
O
R

;
s
e
h
c
a
o
c
y
b
n
o
i
t
r
e
x
e
d
e
d
n
e
t
n

i

f
o
s
g
n
i
t
a
r

i

n
o
i
t
r
e
x
e
d
e
v
e
c
r
e
p
f
o
s
g
n
i
t
a
r

=

I

=

C
U

=

I

E
R

;

=

=

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 20 of 32

moderate (RPE 11–14), and hard (RPE > 14). Unlike previ-
ous studies, Kraft et al. [30] used the athletes’ perceptions 
to classify the training sessions as easy (RPE ≤ 4), moder-
ate (RPE 5–7), and hard (RPE ≥ 8). In turn, the categori-
zation was based on the verbal anchor descriptors of the 
scale used (OMNI from 0 to 10 points): RPE (4 = “Some-
what easy,” 6 = “Somewhat hard,” and 8 = “Hard”).

Study Quality Assessment

The bias scores of the studies included in this systematic 
review  and  meta-analysis  ranged  from  four  (moderate 
risk of bias) to six (low risk of bias) out of eight possible 
points (Table 2). Items 6 and 7 were answered with “No” 
in  all  29  studies  following  the  guidelines  of  the  Qual-
ity Assessment Tool of the National Institutes of Health 
for  Observational  Cohort  and  Cross-sectional  Studies 
because they are cross-sectional studies. Items 3, 8, 9, 10, 
12,  and  13  were  considered  not  applicable  to  the  cross-
sectional studies included in this review. Therefore, eight 
items (1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, and 14) were considered to assess 
the methodological quality of the studies.

Six  studies  were  classified  as  having  a  low  risk  of  bias 
[15, 19, 32, 39, 45, 49], while twenty-three were classified 
as having a moderate risk of bias [5, 16–18, 20, 25–31, 33, 
34, 38, 40–44, 46–48]. All studies in this review included 
the research question or objective (item 1), clearly speci-
fied the study population (item 2), and all subjects were 
selected  or  recruited  from  the  same  or  similar  popula-
tions (item 4). Twenty-three studies [5, 16–18, 20, 25–31, 
33,  34,  38,  40–44,  46–48]  did  not  present  key  potential 
confounding  variables  measured  and  adjusted  statisti-
cally (item 14).

Certainty of Evidence

Using  the  GRADE  approach,  the  certainty  of  evidence 
was  very  low  (Table  3).  The  downgraded  aspects  were 
risk  of  bias  and  imprecision,  and  none  of  the  aspects 
(effect size, dose–response gradient, or confounding fac-
tors) increased the certainty of evidence.

Meta‑Analysis Results

low  heterogeneity  (χ2 = 41.66,  df = 33,  P = 0.14; 
A 
I2 = 21%)  was  observed  in  studies  that  compared  over-
all  RPE  between  coaches  and  athletes.  Likewise,  a  low 
heterogeneity  (χ2 = 3.72,  df = 20,  P = 1.00;  I2 = 0%) 
was  observed  in  studies  that  compared  overall  sRPE 
between  coaches  and  athletes.  When  comparing  the 
RPE  between  coaches  and  athletes  in  the  three  effort 
categories  (easy,  moderate,  and  hard),  a  low  hetero-
geneity  was  observed  for  easy  category  (τ2 = 0.35; 
χ2 = 32.33,  df = 18,  P = 0.02;  I2 = 44%),  a  low  heteroge-
neity  for  the  moderate  category  (χ2 = 28.04,  df = 20, 
P = 0.11;  I2 = 29%),  and  a  moderate  heterogeneity 

for  the  hard  category  (τ2 = 1.19;  χ2 = 68.42,  df = 19, 
P < 0.00001;  I2 = 72%).  When  comparing  the  sRPE 
between  coaches  and  athletes  in  the  three  effort  cat-
egories, a low heterogeneity was observed for the easy 
category (χ2 = 1.18, df = 7, P = 0.99; I2 = 0%), a low het-
erogeneity  for  the  moderate  category  (χ2 = 0.69,  df = 7, 
P = 1.00; I2 = 0%), and a low heterogeneity for the hard 
category (χ2 = 0.65, df = 7, P = 1.00; I2 = 0%).
The  overall  RPE  prescribed/intended/observed  by  the 
coaches showed no significant difference when compared 
to  the  RPE  perceived  by  the  athletes  (Z = 1.64,  P = 0.10, 
SMD = 0.19 [95% CI −0.04 to 0.41]; small effect size, see 
Fig.  2).  Likewise,  no  significant  difference  was  observed 
when  comparing  the  overall  sRPE  prescribed/intended/
observed  by  the  coaches  and  that  perceived  by  the  ath-
letes  (Z = 0.32,  P = 0.75,  SMD = 0.05  [95%  CI  −0.24  to 
0.33];  small  effect  size,  see  Fig.  3).  This  result  indicated 
that  the  athletes  perceived  the  same  intensity  and  inter-
nal load prescribed/intended/observed by the coaches.

When  comparing 

the  RPE  prescribed/intended/
observed  by  the  coaches  and  that  perceived  by  the  ath-
letes  in  the  easy  effort  category,  a  significant  difference 
was  observed  (Z = 2.03,  P = 0.04,  SMD = −0.44  [95% 
CI  −0.87  to  −0.01];  small  effect  size,  Fig.  4,  top  panel). 
Thus, the athletes perceived an intensity greater than the 
coaches  prescribed/intended/observed.  In  the  moderate 
effort  category,  no  significant  difference  was  observed 
when  comparing  RPE  between  coaches  and  athletes 
(Z = 0.34,  P = 0.74,  SMD = 0.05  [95%  CI  −0.22  to  0.31]; 
small effect size, see Fig. 4, middle panel. In the hard cat-
egory,  no  significant  difference  was  observed  between 
the  coaches  prescribed/intended/observed  and  the  ath-
letes  perceived  (Z = 1.34,  P = 0.18,  SMD = 0.41  [95%  CI 
−0.19  to  1.00];  small  effect  size,  Fig.  4,  bottom  panel). 
This result indicated that the athletes perceived the same 
intensity prescribed/intended/observed by the coaches.

In  the  comparison  between  the  sRPE  prescribed/
intended/observed by the coaches and that perceived by 
the  athletes  in  the  easy  effort  category,  a  significant  dif-
ference  was  observed  (Z = 2.05,  P = 0.04,  SMD = −0.54, 
95% CI [−1.05 to −0.02]; moderate effect size, see Fig. 5, 
top  panel). Thus,  the  athletes  perceived  an  internal  load 
greater  than  the  coaches  prescribed/intended/observed. 
In the moderate effort category, no significant difference 
was  observed  when  comparing  sRPE  between  coaches 
and  athletes  (Z = 0.59,  P = 0.56,  SMD = −0.15  [95%  CI 
−0.66 to 0.36]; small effect size, see Fig. 5, middle panel). 
In  the  category  of  hard  effort,  no  significant  difference 
was  observed  when  comparing  the  sRPE  prescribed/
intended/observed  by  the  coaches  and  that  perceived 
by  the  athletes  (Z = 0.79,  P = 0.43,  SMD = 0.20  [95%  CI 
−0.30 to 0.71]; small effect size, see Fig. 5, bottom panel). 
The  results  of  the  moderate  and  hard  effort  categories 

Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 21 of 32

s
e
r
o
c
S

4
1
m
e
t
I

3
1
m
e
t
I

2
1
m
e
t
I

1
1
m
e
t
I

0
1
m
e
t
I

9
m
e
t
I

8
m
e
t
I

7
m
e
t
I

6
m
e
t
I

5
m
e
t
I

4
m
e
t
I

3
m
e
t
I

2
m
e
t
I

1
m
e
t
I

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

l

a
n
o
i
t
c
e
s
-
s
s
o
r
c
d
n
a
t
r
o
h
o
c

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
o
r
o

f

l

o
o
t

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a
y
t
i
l

a
u
Q

2
e
l
b
a
T

8
/
4

8
/
5

8
/
6

8
/
5

8
/
5

8
/
5

8
/
6

8
/
5

8
/
5

8
/
6

8
/
5

8
/
5

8
/
5

8
/
5

8
/
5

8
/
6

8
/
4

8
/
6

8
/
5

8
/
5

8
/
5

8
/
5

8
/
5

8
/
6

8
/
5

8
/
5

8
/
5

8
/
5

8
/
5

o
N

o
N

s
e
Y

o
N

o
N

o
N

s
e
Y

o
N

o
N

s
e
Y

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

s
e
Y

o
N

s
e
Y

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

s
e
Y

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

:

4
m
e
t
I

;
?
%
0
5
t
s
a
e

l

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

t
a
s
n
o
s
r
e
p
e
b
g

l

i

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

o
N

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

A
N

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

]
5
2
[

.
l

a
t
e
a
r
i
e
u
g
o
N
e
d
a
r
d
n
A

]
4
4
[

.
l

a
t
e
e
d
a
r
d
n
A

]
9
1
[

.
l

a
t
e
s
e
n
r
a
B

]
6
2
[

.
l

a
t
e
o
s
o
r
r
a
B

]
8
3
[

.
l

a
t
e
o
s
o
r
r
a
B

]
5
[

.
l

a
t
e
k
n
i
r
B

]
9
3
[

.
l

a
t
e
k
n
i
r
B

]
7
2
[

.
l

a
t
e
z
u
r
C

]
5
1
[

.
l

a
t
e
o
d
e
r
i
e
u
g
F

i

]
0
4
[

.
l

a
t
e
n
e
v
e
o
D

]
1
4
[

.
l

a
t
e
a
r
u
m
a
m

I

]
7
1
[

.
l

a
t
e
r
e
t
s
o
F

]
8
2
[

.
l

a
t
e
o
n
e

I

]
9
2
[

.
l

a
t
e
e
u
o
n

I

]
0
3
[

.
l

a
t
e
t
f
a
r
K

]
5
4
[

.
l

a
t
e
o
p
u
L

]
2
4
[

.
l

a
t
e
a
n
d
e
M

i

]
9
4
[

.
l

a
t
e
y
h
p
r
u
M

]
1
3
[

.
l

a
t
e
a
r
i
e
u
g
o
N

]
6
4
[

.
l

a
t
e
n
u
t
y
O

]
0
2
[

.
l

a
t
e
o
e
b
a
R

l

]
6
1
[

.
l

a
t
e
a
v
k
d
e
R

]
7
4
[

.
l

a
t
e
o
y
o
r
r
a
M

-
s
e
u
g
i
r
d
o
R

]
3
3
[

.
l

a
t
e
r
o
n
n
o
C
O

’

-
t
t
o
n
n
S

i

]
2
3
[

.
l

a
t
e
y
r
u
b
e
l
t
n
a
c
S

]
3
4
[

.
l

a
t
e
a
r
e
u
q
a
V

]
8
4
[

.
l

a
t
e
s
o
r
i
e
v
V

i

]
8
1
[

.
l

a
t
e
e
c
a

l
l

a
W

]
4
3
[

.
l

a
t
e
t
e
o
V

i
l

e
f
o
e
t
a
r
n
o
i
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
e
h
t

:

s
a
W
3
m
e
t
I

;
?
d
e
n
fi
e
d
d
n
a
d
e
fi
i
c
e
p
s
y
l
r
a
e
l
c
n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
y
d
u
t
s
e
h
t

l

:

s
a
W
2
m
e
t
I

;
?
d
e
t
a
t
s
y
l
r
a
e
l
c
r
e
p
a
p
s
i
h
t
n

i

j

e
v
i
t
c
e
b
o
r
o
n
o
i
t
s
e
u
q
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r
e
h
t

:

s
a
W
1
m
e
t
I

)
s
(
e
m
o
c
t
u
o
e
h
t
o
t

r
o
i
r
p
d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

t
s
e
r
e
t
n

i

f
o
)
s
(
e
r
u
s
o
p
x
e
e
h
t
e
r
e
w

,
r
e
p
a
p
s
i
h
t
n

i

s
e
s
y
l
a
n
a
e
h
t

r
o
F

:

6
m
e
t
I

i

;
?
d
e
d
v
o
r
p
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
t
c
e
ff
e
d
n
a
e
c
n
a
i
r
a
v
r
o

,

n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
d
r
e
w
o
p

,

n
o
i
t
a
c
fi
i
t
s
u

j

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
s
a
s
a
W
5
m
e
t
I

:

;
?
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p

d
d

i

,
l

e
v
e

l

r
o
t
n
u
o
m
a
n

i

y
r
a
v
n
a
c
t
a
h
t

s
e
r
u
s
o
p
x
e
r
o
F

:

8
m
e
t
I

;
?
d
e
t
s
i
x
e
t
i

f
i

e
m
o
c
t
u
o
d
n
a
e
r
u
s
o
p
x
e
n
e
e
w
t
e
b
n
o
i
t
a
i
c
o
s
s
a
n
a
e
e
s
o
t

t
c
e
p
x
e
y
l
b
a
n
o
s
a
e
r
d
u
o
c
e
n
o
t
a
h
t
o
s

l

t
n
e
i
c
ffi
u
s
e
m
a
r
f
e
m

i
t
e
h
t

:

s
a
W
7
m
e
t
I

;
?
d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
g
n
e
b

i

l

)
s
e
b
a
i
r
a
v
t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
(

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
e
m
o
c
t
u
o
e
h
t
e
r
e
W
1
1
m
e
t
I

:

;
?
e
m

i
t

r
e
v
o
e
c
n
o
n
a
h
t
e
r
o
m
d
e
s
s
e
s
s
a
)
s
(
e
r
u
s
o
p
x
e
e
h
t

:

s
a
W
0
1
m
e
t
I

;
?
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
y
d
u
t
s

r
e
t
f
a
p
u
-
w
o

l
l

o
f
o
t

s
s
o

l

:

s
a
W
3
1
m
e
t
I

;
?
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
f
o
s
u
t
a
t
s
e
r
u
s
o
p
x
e
e
h
t
o
t
d
e
d
n

i
l

b
s
r
o
s
s
e
s
s
a
e
m
o
c
t
u
o
e
h
t
e
r
e
W
2
1
m
e
t
I

:

;
?
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
y
d
u
t
s

l
l

l
l

a
s
s
o
r
c
a
y
l
t
n
e
t
s
i
s
n
o
c
d
e
t
n
e
m
e
p
m

l

i

a
s
s
o
r
c
a
y
l
t
n
e
t
s
i
s
n
o
c
d
e
t
n
e
m
e
p
m

l

i

d
n
a

d
n
a

,

l

e
b
a

,

l

e
b
a

i
l

e
r

,

d

i
l

a
v

,

d
e
n
fi
e
d
y
l
r
a
e
l
c

i
l

e
r

,

d

i
l

a
v

,

d
e
n
fi
e
d
y
l
r
a
e
l
c

7
d
n
a
6
s

m
e
t
I

.

l

e
b
a
c
i
l

p
p
a
t
o
N

:

A
N

;
?
)
s
(
e
m
o
c
t
u
o
d
n
a
)
s
(
e
r
u
s
o
p
x
e
n
e
e
w
t
e
b
p
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
e
r
e
h
t
n
o
t
c
a
p
m

l

i

i

r
i
e
h
t

r
o
f
y
l
l

j

a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s
d
e
t
s
u
d
a
d
n
a
d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

l

s
e
b
a
i
r
a
v
g
n
d
n
u
o
f
n
o
c
l

i

a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
y
e
k
e
r
e
W
4
1
m
e
t
I

:

;
?
s
s
e

l

r
o
%
0
2
e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b

l

)
s
e
b
a
i
r
a
v
t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n
i
(

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
e
r
u
s
o
p
x
e
e
h
t
e
r
e
W
9
m
e
t
I

:

l

;
?
)
e
b
a
i
r
a
v
s
u
o
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
s
a
d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
e
r
u
s
o
p
x
e
r
o

,

e
r
u
s
o
p
x
e
f
o
s
e
i
r
o
g
e
t
a
c

,
.

.

g
e
(
e
m
o
c
t
u
o
e
h
t
o
t
d
e
t
a
e
r

l

s
a
e
r
u
s
o
p
x
e
e
h
t

f
o
s
l
e
v
e

l

i

i

t
n
e
r
e
ff
d
e
n
m
a
x
e
y
d
u
t
s
e
h
t

l
l

a
o
t
y
l
m
r
o
f
i
n
u
d
e

i
l

p
p
a
d
n
a
d
e
fi
i
c
e
p
s
e
r
p
y
d
u
t
s
e
h
t
n

i

i

g
n
e
b
r
o
f
a
i
r
e
t
i
r
c
n
o
i
s
u
l
c
x
e
d
n
a
n
o
i
s
u
l
c
n

i

e
r
e
W

?
)
d
o
i
r
e
p
e
m

i
t
e
m
a
s
e
h
t
g
n
d
u
l
c
n
i
(

i

l

s
n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
r
a

l
i

m

i
s

r
o
e
m
a
s
e
h
t

m
o
r
f
d
e
t
i
u
r
c
e
r

r
o
d
e
t
c
e
e
s

l

j

s
t
c
e
b
u
s
e
h
t

l
l

a
e
r
e
W

e
r
e
w
3
1
d
n
a

,

2
1

,

0
1

,

9

,

8

,

3
s

m
e
t
I

i

.
s
e
d
u
t
S

l

a
n
o
i
t
c
e
S
-
s
s
o
r
C
d
n
a
t
r
o
h
o
C

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

r
o
f

l

o
o
T
t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
A
y
t
i
l

a
u
Q
h
t
l
a
e
H

f
o
s
e
t
u
t
i
t
s
n

I

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
N
e
h
t

f
o
s
e
n

i
l

i

i

e
d
u
g
e
h
t
o
t
g
n
d
r
o
c
c
a
s
e
d
u
t
s
9
2

i

l
l

a
n

i
”
o
N
“
h
t
i

w
d
e
r
e
w
s
n
a
e
r
e
w

i

w
e
v
e
r

s
i
h
t
n

i

d
e
d
u
l
c
n

i

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

l

a
n
o
i
t
c
e
s
-
s
s
o
r
c
e
h
t
o
t
e
b
a
c
i
l

l

p
p
a
t
o
n
d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 22 of 32

e
c
n
a
t
r
o
p
m

I

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
C

t
c
e
ff
E

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
f
o
№

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a
y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
C

l

e
t
u
o
s
b
A

)
I
C
%
5
9
(

e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

)
I
C
%
5
9
(

s
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

s
e
t
e
h
t
A

l

s
e
h
c
a
o
C

r
e
h
t

O

n
o
i
s
i
c
e
r
p
m

I

s
s
e
n
t
c
e
r
i
d
n

I

y
c
n
e
t
s
i
s
n
o
c
n

I

s
a
i
b
f
o
k
s
i
R

n
g
i
s
e
d
y
d
u
t
S

i

s
e
d
u
t
s
f
o
o
N

e
c
n
e
d
v
e
f

i

i

o
y
t
n
a
t
r
e
c
e
h
t
n
o
n
o
i
t
a
u
a
v
e
d
n
a

l

,
t
n
e
m
p
o
e
v
e
d

l

,
t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a
s
n
o
i
t
a
d
n
e
m
m
o
c
e
r

f

i

o
g
n
d
a
r
g
h
c
a
o
r
p
p
A

3
e
l
b
a
T

T
N
A
T
R
O
P
M

I

T
N
A
T
R
O
P
M

I

T
N
A
T
R
O
P
M

I

T
N
A
T
R
O
P
M

I

T
N
A
T
R
O
P
M

I

T
N
A
T
R
O
P
M

I

T
N
A
T
R
O
P
M

I

T
N
A
T
R
O
P
M

I

◯
◯
◯
⊕

w
o

l

y
r
e
V

◯
◯
◯
⊕

w
o

l

y
r
e
V

◯
◯
◯
⊕

w
o

l

y
r
e
V

◯
◯
◯
⊕

w
o

l

y
r
e
V

◯
◯
◯
⊕

w
o

l

y
r
e
V

◯
◯
◯
⊕

w
o
y
r
e
V

l

◯
◯
◯
⊕

w
o

l

y
r
e
V

◯
◯
◯
⊕

w
o

l

y
r
e
V

r
e
w
o

l

.

D
S
9
1
0
D
M
S

.

1
4
0
o
t

r
e
w
o

l

4
0
0
(

.

)
r
e
h
g
h

i

.

3
3
0
o
t

r
e
w
o

l

4
2
0
(

.

.

D
S
5
0
0
D
M
S

r
e
h
g
h

i

)
r
e
h
g
h

i

r
e
w
o

l

.

D
S
4
4
0
D
M
S

.

1
0
0
o
t

r
e
w
o

l

7
8
0
(

.

)
r
e
w
o

l

.

1
3
0
o
t

r
e
w
o

l

2
2
0
(

.

.

D
S
5
0
0
D
M
S

r
e
h
g
h

i

)
r
e
h
g
h

i

.

D
S
1
4
0
D
M
S

r
e
h
g
h

i

1
o
t

r
e
w
o

l

9
1
0
(

.

)
r
e
h
g
h

i

r
e
w
o

l

.

D
S
4
5
0
D
M
S

.

2
0
0
o
t

r
e
w
o

l

5
0
1
(

.

)
r
e
w
o

l

r
e
w
o

l

.

D
S
5
1
0
D
M
S

.

6
3
0
o
t

r
e
w
o

l

6
6
0
(

.

)
r
e
h
g
h

i

i

r
e
h
g
h
D
S
2
0
D
M
S

.

.

1
7
0
o
t

r
e
w
o

l

.

3
0
(

)
r
e
h
g
h

i

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

2
0
6

9
0
1

e
n
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

a
s
u
o
i
r
e
S

8
6
3

1
6

e
n
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

a
s
u
o
i
r
e
S

8
1
5

3
6

e
n
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

a
s
u
o
i
r
e
S

b
d
e
t
c
e
p
s
u
 s
y
g
n
o
r
t
s

l

6
3
5

4
6

i

s
a
b
n
o
i
t
a
c

i
l

b
u
P

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

a
s
u
o
i
r
e
S

6
3
5

4
6

e
n
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

c
s
u
o
i
r
e
S

a
s
u
o
i
r
e
S

4
1
1

8
1

e
n
o
N

d
s
u
o
i
r
e
S

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

a
s
u
o
i
r
e
S

4
1
1

8
1

e
n
o
N

d
s
u
o
i
r
e
S

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

a
s
u
o
i
r
e
S

4
1
1

8
1

e
n
o
N

d
s
u
o
i
r
e
S

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

s
u
o
i
r
e
s

t
o
N

a
s
u
o
i
r
e
S

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

E
P
R

l
l
a
r
e
v
O

4
3

E
P
R
s
l
l
a
r
e
v
O

1
2

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

E
P
R
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

1
2

E
P
R
y
s
a
E

0
2

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

E
P
R
d
r
a
H

1
2

E
P
R
s
y
s
a
E

8

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

E
P
R
s
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

8

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
O

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

E
P
R
s
d
r
a
H

8

i

e
c
n
e
r
e
ff
d
n
a
e
m
d
e
z
i
d
r
a
d
n
a
t
s
D
M
S

,
l

a
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
c
n
e
d
fi
n
o
c
I

C

i

i

s
a
b
f
o
k
s
i
r
h
g
h
r
o
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
a
h
t
i

w
s
e
d
u
t
s

i

m
o
r
f
e
r
e
w
s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
f
o
%
5
2
n
a
h
t
e
r
o
M

.

a

s
n
o
i
t
a
n
a
p
x
E

l

y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
e
h
t
n

i

E
P
R
r
o
f

i

s
a
b
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l

b
u
p

l

a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
d
e
t
a
c
i
d
n

i

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
g
e
r

r
a
e
n

i
l

s
’
r
e
g
g
E

.

b

%
0
5
>
2
I

y
t
i
e
n
e
g
o
r
e
t
e
H

.

c

0
4
1
n
a
h
t

s
s
e

l

s
i

n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
c
s
i
h
t
n

i

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
p
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
n

l

a
t
o
t
e
h
T

.

d

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 23 of 32

=

 Female, M 

 First week, 2nd w 

Fig. 2  Forest plot comparing overall RPE between coaches and athletes. CI 
 Second week, 3rd w 
1st w 
F 
=
exertion by coaches, BB (1kk) 
belt (1000 punches), BC 
 5-a-side game
5v5 

 Ratings of perceived exertion, RIE 

 Black belt (1000 kicks), BB (1kp) 

 Beginner coaches, EC 

 Expert coaches, 1v1 

=
 Versus, RPE 

 Third week, PS 

 Male, v 

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

 Confidence interval, IV 

 Inverse variance, SD 

 Standard deviation, 

=
 Physical sessions, SS 

=
 Strength sessions, TTS 

 Tactical-technical sessions, 

=

=

=

 Ratings of intended exertion by coaches, ROE 

 White belt (1000 kicks), WB (1kp) 

=

 Ratings of observed 
 White 

 Black belt (1000 punches), WB (1kk) 
 One-a-side game, 2v2 

=

 2-a-side game, 3v2 

 Superiority situations game, 

=

=

=

=

indicate  that  athletes  perceived  the  same  internal  load 
prescribed/intended/observed by the coaches.

Egger’s linear regression indicated no potential publica-
tion biases for overall RPE (P = 0.51), and for RPE in the 
easy  (P = 0.37),  and  hard  (P = 0.51)  categories.  However, 
Egger’s  linear  regression  indicated  potential  publication 
bias  for  RPE  in  the  moderate  category  (P = 0.03).  No 
potential publication bias was observed for overall sRPE 
(P = 0.22), and for sRPE in the easy (P = 0.10), moderate 
(P = 0.34),  and  hard  (P = 0.68)  categories,  respectively. 
The funnel plots (Additional file 1: Figure S1 to S3) depict 
the distribution of these data.

RPE  and  sRPE  perceived  by  the  athletes  and  those  pre-
scribed/intended/observed  by  the  coaches  (Figs.  2  and 
3); (2) Significant differences were observed between the 
RPE  and  sRPE  perceived  by  the  athletes  and  those  pre-
scribed/intended/observed  by  the  coaches  in  training 
sessions  classified  as  easy  (Figs.  4  and  5),  in  which  the 
athletes perceived intensity and internal load greater than 
that  prescribed/intended/observed  by  the  coach;  (3)  No 
significant  differences  were  observed  between  the  RPE 
and sRPE perceived by the athletes and those prescribed/
intended/observed  by  the  coaches  in  training  sessions 
classified as moderate and hard (Figs. 4 and 5).

Discussion
This systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to inves-
tigate whether there are differences between the training 
load perceived by athletes and that prescribed/intended/
observed by coaches. The main findings were: (1) No sig-
nificant  differences  were  observed  between  the  overall 

Agreement and Disagreement on Training Load Between 
Athletes and Coaches

The  high-performance  sport  imposes  intense  training 
loads  on  athletes,  establishing  a  complex  relationship 
between  an  adequate  application  of  these  training  loads 
and the recovery process. In this sense, the quantification 

 Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 24 of 32

Fig. 3  Forest plot comparing overall sRPE between coaches and athletes. CI 
 Second week, 3rd w 
1st w 
 Male, v 
 Female, M 
TS 
=
ROE 

 First week, 2nd w 
=
 Technical sessions, F 

 Ratings of observed exertion by coaches, BC 

 Third week, PS 
 Versus, RPE 

 Beginner coaches, EC 

=
=

=
=

=

=

=

 Confidence interval, IV 

 Inverse variance, SD 

 Standard deviation, 

=
 Physical sessions, SS 

=
 Strength sessions, TTS 

 Ratings of perceived exertion, RIE 

=

 Tactical-technical sessions, 
 Ratings of intended exertion by coaches, 

=

=

 Expert coaches

=

=

=

=

of  training  load  becomes  essential  to  monitor  and  pre-
scribe  a  training  program  for  athletes,  thus  ensuring 
increased performance [2]. Therefore, the coaches should 
know  how  each  athlete  perceives  the  prescribed  load 
of  successive  training  sessions  [15].  To  accurately  pre-
scribe  training  loads  and  interpret  athlete  responses,  it 
is essential to establish an agreement between what was 
prescribed  by  the  coach  and  what  was  perceived  by  the 
athlete.  This  review  showed  that  overall  RPE  and  sRPE 
were  similar  between  athletes  and  coaches.  This  good 
relationship  between  coach  and  athlete  is  essential  to 
achieve  the  established  goals  and  optimize  individual 
performance.  However,  significant  differences  were 
observed  between  the  RPE  and  sRPE  perceived  by  the 
athletes  and  those  prescribed/intended/observed  by  the 
coaches in training sessions classified as easy.

The  agreement  and  disagreement  may  be  related  to 
several  factors  such  as  differences  in  coach  supervision 
during  training  sessions,  physiological  and  psychosocial 
factors,  communication  between  coaches  and  athletes, 
coach  experience,  athlete  experience  [19],  competition 
atmosphere,  crowd,  motivation,  competition  outcome, 

sponsors [40], environmental factors such as temperature 
and  humidity,  and  factors  influencing  athlete  recovery 
(diet, sleep, personal stressors) [30].

Scale Used

The  rationale  for  differences  between  the  training  load 
perceived  by  athletes  and  that  prescribed/intended/
observed by coaches has not been fully elucidated. How-
ever,  it  seems  not  to  be  related  to  the  scale  used.  There 
are a variety of scales that can be used to measure RPE. 
The Borg CR10 Scale, the Borg Scale 6–20, and a generic 
0-to-10-point scale without images using the Omni ver-
bal cues for adults (OMNI) were also used in this review. 
In  addition,  we  observed  different  cutoff  values  to  clas-
sify sessions into easy, moderate, and hard. However, the 
results seem not to be influenced by scale choice or cutoff 
values.  A  good  verbal  anchorage  seems  to  be  important 
and  will  allow  the  athlete  to  define  the  intensity  zones 
more precisely [13, 50]. It is essential that athletes under-
stand the scale and accurately link physical sensations to 
a  number  on  the  scale  during  different  exercise  intensi-
ties [51]. Different questions have been used to measure 

(See figure on next page.)
Fig. 4  Forest plot comparing RPE between coaches and athletes in three effort categories, easy (top panel), moderate (middle panel) and 
hard (bottom panel). CI 
RPE 
=
Pre-S 

 Years old, v 
=
 Ratings of observed exertion by coaches, 

 Ratings of intended exertion by coaches, ROE 

 Ratings of perceived exertion, RIE 

 intercompetition period, C2 

 Second competitive period

 First competitive period, IC 

 Confidence interval, IV 

 Standard deviation, F 

 Inverse variance, SD 

 Pre-season, C1 

 Female, M 

 Male, y 

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

 Versus, 

=

=

=

=

Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 25 of 32

Fig. 4  (See legend on previous page.)

 Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 26 of 32

Fig. 5  Forest plot comparing sRPE between coaches and athletes in three effort categories, easy (top panel), moderate (middle panel) and hard 
(bottom panel). CI 

 Confidence interval, IV 

 Standard deviation, F 

 Inverse variance, SD 

 Female, M 

 Male

=

=

=

=

=

the RPE and sRPE as, for example, “How hard was your 
session?”,  “How  was  your  training  session  today?”,  “How 
was  your  workout?”.  A  slight  difference  in  the  text  and 
the way the question is asked can influence the athlete’s 
perception  and  response,  making  comparisons  between 
studies  difficult.  However,  there  is  no  knowledge  about 
the  influence  of  these  small  changes  on  the  accuracy  of 
the tool’s use by coaches [52]. In this sense, these differ-
ent  questions  do  not  seem  to  influence  the  results  [22, 
53]. Thus, there is no ideal scale but the need for familiar-
ization  and  good  verbal  anchoring  [54].  Besides,  Coyne 
et  al.  [54]  reported  that  a  100-point  RPE  category  ratio 
scale (CR100) should be considered to improve sensitiv-
ity. The CR100 may have greater sensitivity due to more 
verbal  anchors  and  a  finer  grading  than  the  CR10  scale 
[54].  However,  counter-evidence  shows  interchange-
ability  between  the  CR100  and  CR10  scales  [55,  56].  In 

addition, no study included in this systematic review and 
meta-analysis used the CR100 scale.

Age and Sporting Experience

The  agreement/disagreement  between  coach  and  ath-
lete  can  also  be  influenced  by  age  and  sporting  expe-
rience  [15].  Agreement  between  coaches  and  athletes 
tended  to  increase  with  age  and  experience.  Based  on 
the  results  of  Barroso  et  al.  [26],  it  is  conceivable  that 
more  experienced  athletes  may  perceive  effort  better 
than less experienced athletes due to greater variability 
in stimuli during their years of training. This variability 
in intensity can improve RPE, allowing athletes to expe-
rience and identify various physiological changes, thus 
creating  an  internal  anchor  for  their  efforts.  Another 
critical  point  is  that  the  instructions  given  to  younger 
athletes  must  be  clearly  defined,  as  there  is  a  lack  of 

Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 27 of 32

sports  maturity  to  accurately  perceive  the  intensity  of 
the  training  load  [26].  Misunderstanding  instructions 
can induce athletes to perform tasks at different inten-
sities  from  those  previously  planned,  affecting  RPE. 
Thus, coaches must be concerned with how to provide 
information  to  their  athletes.  However,  more  studies 
are  needed  to  understand  better  how  instruction  can 
affect  the  relationship  between  coaches  and  athletes’ 
RPE.  Furthermore,  it  seems  important  that  young  ath-
letes perform training at different intensities to improve 
their intensity effort perception [26].

Observed RPE/sRPE

Brink  et  al.  [39]  reported  that  coaches  adjust  their  per-
ceptions  after  observing  training  sessions;  however,  the 
incompatibility  with  players’  perceptions  remained.  In 
fact, previous findings suggest coaches cannot accurately 
observe the internal load of players [47, 49]. Scantlebury 
et  al.  [32]  found  that  the  level  of  agreement  between 
coach and athlete RPE improved following training with 
coaches  altering  their  RPE  to  align  with  the  athlete’s. 
They found the relationship between coach observed and 
athlete  perceived  RPE  to  improve  compared  to  coach 
intended  and  athlete  perceived  RPE.  To  reduce  issues 
arising from the over/under-prescription of training load, 
coaches  must  ensure  that  desired  athlete  responses  to 
training  are  being  achieved  [32].  Importantly,  the  coach 
could  re-align  the  training  load  if  there  is  a  mismatch. 
The incompatibility can be observed through daily moni-
toring  of  recovery  and  applied  training  loads.  In  this 
sense,  coaches  should  intervene,  increasing/decreasing 
training intensity and/or volume. The underestimation of 
RPE and sRPE as seen during easy training sessions may 
predispose the athlete to overuse injury or nonfunctional 
overreaching  through  an  inability  to  handle  the  excess 
load [32].

Endurance Capacity

An individual characteristic influencing RPE is the inter-
mittent  endurance  capacity  [57].  For  example,  coaches 
estimate  that  athletes  with  a  higher  intermittent  endur-
ance  capacity  will  perceive  training  to  be  less  intense 
[39].  It  is  noteworthy  that  this  characteristic  is  more 
evident  in  team  sports.  Furthermore,  Barroso  et  al.  [38] 
reported that the greater volume and distance of repeti-
tion  during  interval  training  influence  the  classification 
of  the  subjective  perception  of  the  session,  increase  the 
inter-individual  variability,  and  affect  the  relationship 
between coaches and athletes. In this sense, care must be 
taken when prescribing sessions with greater volume and 
distance.

Effort Categories and Female/Male Athletes

There is a tendency to prescribe moderate-intensity train-
ing  loads  [58].  Gearhart  et  al.  [51]  proposed  that  trained 
athletes  can  more  easily  identify  the  intensity  levels  they 
experience  most  frequently.  The  discrepancy  between 
athletes and coaches in the easy category may be psycho-
physiological  [6].  There  is  a  trend  for  athletes  to  report 
perceptions  of  moderate-intensity,  which  would  be  the 
pleasure perception zone. In this sense, low intensity can-
not motivate [59, 60]. In addition, since easy or moderate 
training sessions often follow hard sessions, another expla-
nation could be that coaches may have a misconception of 
the athlete’s physiological state after the training load from 
the  previous  session.  Although  coaches  expect  an  easy 
training  session  the  day  after  a  hard  session,  it  is  possible 
that  athletes  do  not  recover  physically  or  psychologically 
enough to perceive this training as easy [19]. In an attempt 
to highlight to coaches which athletes are entering sessions 
not recovered, quantitative markers could be used to assess 
recovery (e.g., perceived recovery status scale, total quality 
of recovery scale, well-being indices, etc.) [56, 61, 62].

There  is  a  lack  of  data  comparing  the  perceptions  of 
female  athletes  to  coaches  in  any  sport  or  discipline.  In 
this  sense,  Barnes’  study  [19]  compared  the  perceptions 
of  training  doses  between  coaches  and  male  and  female 
cross-country runners. Twenty-five highly-trained cross-
country runners (13 male and 12 female) were recruited. 
The  results  showed  that  men  and  women  rated  coach-
intended  easy  sessions  significantly  harder  during  each 
month of the season. Men rated moderate intensity ses-
sions  significantly  higher  than  coaches,  whereas  females 
rated  hard  intensity  sessions  significantly  lower  than 
coaches.  There  was  no  difference  between  males’  and 
coaches’  hard  sessions  or  females’  and  coaches’  mod-
erate  sessions.  Therefore,  men  and  women  report  dif-
ferent  RPE/sRPE  in  moderate  and  hard  sessions  [19]. 
The  reasons  for  these  discrepancies  between  male  and 
female  athletes  are  unknown.  Studies  are  controversial 
when  comparing  sexes  on  the  perceived  exertion  scale. 
Some  studies  have  reported  differences  in  RPE  between 
men and women using different exercise intensity mark-
ers (absolute vs. relative) [63, 64]. More recently, Rascon 
et  al.  [65]  showed  no  differences  in  RPE  in  any  of  the 
three  exercise  intensities  (low:  < 2  mmol/L,  moderate: 
2–4  mmol/L,  and  high:  > 4  mmol/L)  between  men  and 
women.

Type of Sport

The  coach-athlete  mismatch  observed  in  the  easy  effort 
category between the studies may be related to the type of 
sport. It is speculated that for individual sports (cycling, 
running, swimming), the prescription and monitoring of 

 Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 28 of 32

the  training  load  are  easier  to  perform  when  compared 
to  team  sports.  This  meta-analysis  showed  that  there  is 
a disagreement between coaches and athletes in the easy 
effort category regardless of the sport.

attempt  to  manipulate  future  training  sessions  or  to  be 
selected for important competitions [54]. When planning 
the training, accounting for these issues is a complex and 
challenging task for coaches.

Coaching Experience

The  coach’s  experience  can  also  affect  the  intended/
observed  training  load.  In  a  study  included  in  this  sys-
tematic  review  and  meta-analyses,  the  RPE  and  sRPE 
of  expert  (> 10  years)  and  beginner  (≤ 1  year)  coaches 
were compared with the RPE and sRPE of volleyball ath-
letes.  The  results  showed  the  correspondence  between 
the RPE and sRPE of athletes and coaches, regardless of 
experience.

Training or Match/Games

Good performance in competitions is an important goal 
of  every  athlete;  however,  the  proportion  of  time  spent 
on  competitions  is  small  compared  to  the  time  spent 
on  training  sessions.  Doeven  et  al.  [40]  showed  that  the 
athletes’  RPE  was  lower  than  ratings  of  observed  exer-
tion by coaches (15.6 ± 2.3 and 16.1 ± 1.4). In this sense, 
the  coach  overestimates  match  exertion.  In  contrast, 
Vaquera  et  al.  [43]  showed  differences  between  athletes’ 
and  coaches’  RPE  in  small-sided  games  (P < 0.002).  The 
coach’s  RPE  was  lower  when  compared  to  the  athletes’ 
RPE.  It  is  noteworthy  that  during  competition  trips, 
coaches may not be aware of the activities performed by 
athletes  in  the  hours  between  training  sessions.  Lack  of 
recovery or additional physical activity can result in accu-
mulated  fatigue  and  greater  perceived  exertion,  even  if 
the  external  load  is  similar.  Previous  research  has  iden-
tified that different intensities and training exercises can 
influence  the  mismatch  between  perceptions  of  effort 
[47, 49]. For example, volleyball coaches underestimated 
players’  RPE,  particularly  during  high-intensity  fitness 
exercises. However, the volume of technical-tactical exer-
cises  prescribed  with  moderate  intensity  corresponded 
to  the  dose  of  exercise  received  [47].  This  result  is  con-
gruent with data from elite junior tennis athletes, where 
coaches  underestimated  the  overall  RPE  of  the  athletes’ 
training session but not the RPE of the different types of 
individual exercises [49].

Cognitive Demands

Cognitively  demanding  tasks,  such  as  new  tactical  con-
cepts  in  training,  can  also  increase  RPE  values  [39,  66]. 
This  is  especially  important  because  cognitive  tasks 
impair  physical  performance  [67].  Besides  that,  poor 
education  of  athletes  has  been  recognized  as  a  limiting 
factor  when  using  subjective  load  monitoring  proce-
dures.  If  education  around  subjective  load  monitoring 
is  not  adequate,  athletes  may  answer  dishonestly  in  an 

Consequences of Divergent Perceptions Between Athletes 
and Coaches

The  effective  alternation  between  training  load  and 
recovery theoretically improves sports performance [68]. 
Signs of inadequate recovery and maladaptation are evi-
dent  when  athletes  train  more  intensely  than  planned 
for  long  periods  [4].  In  contrast,  if  athletes  do  not  exert 
enough effort on the days planned to be intense, training 
stimuli may not be sufficient to provoke adequate adapta-
tions [17]. The tendency of athletes to report perceptions 
of  moderate  training  loads  can  have  important  implica-
tions  for  training.  The  tendency  of  the  training  load  to 
regress  to  the  mean  rather  than  remain  polarized  (e.g., 
easy days and hard days) is considered a common train-
ing error [17]. It has been suggested that this decrease in 
the daily variability of the training load increases monot-
ony [19], a known risk factor for overtraining [22]. Addi-
tionally, imprecision in the prescription and training load 
monitoring are essential factors that increase the risk of 
injuries and illnesses [22, 69].

For  example,  Brink  et  al.  [5]  reported  that  soccer  ath-
letes perceived the training loads prescribed by the coach 
to be easy and moderate as harder. At the same time, the 
athletes perceived the sessions prescribed by the coaches 
to be hard as easier. The study by Kraft et al. [30] found 
the  opposite,  with  coaches  reporting  higher  RPE  during 
sessions  rated  as  easy  or  moderate  and  lower  RPE  dur-
ing sessions rated as hard. This pattern would be prefer-
able  because  it  would  indicate  greater  training  variation 
(i.e.,  easy  and  moderate  training  sessions  easier  than 
perceived,  while  hard  sessions  were  more  intense  than 
coaches  reported),  thus  decreasing  training  monotony 
and  risk  of  overtraining.  It  is  noteworthy  that,  unlike 
published  studies,  athletes’  perceptions  were  used  to 
classify  training  sessions  as  easy,  moderate,  and  hard. 
Additionally, instead of prescribing RPE before the train-
ing  session,  the  coaches  in  the  study  by  Kraft  et  al.  [30] 
reported  RPE  approximately  15–20  min  after  observing 
the training session.

Daily  control  with  feedback  to  coaches  is  key  to 
decreasing the risk of injury and improving physical per-
formance [69]. In addition, an increased RPE for a typi-
cal training session can be used as a guide for coaches to 
monitor  individual  increases  in  fatigue  or  decreases  in 
fitness levels. On the other hand, a reduction in RPE for 
these standard training sessions may indicate adaptation 
to training [18].

Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 29 of 32

Association Between Coaches and Athletes

A  recent  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  inves-
tigated  the  relationship  between  coaches’  rating  of 
intended exertion and/or rating of observed exertion and 
athletes’ reported rating of perceived exertion (for review, 
see  [52]).  A  random  effect  meta-analysis  based  on  11 
studies  demonstrated  a  positive  association  of  athletes’ 
vs.  coaches’  rating  of  intended  exertion  of  r = 0.62.  The 
pooled correlation from 7 studies of athletes’ vs. coaches’ 
rating  on  observed  exertion  was  r = 0.64.  In  this  sense, 
there  was  a  strong  association  between  coach  rating  of 
intended exertion and/or rating of observed exertion and 
athlete-reported RPE. In our systematic review and meta-
analysis, sixteen studies performed a correlation analysis 
between  coaches’  and  athletes’  rating  of  exertion.  Based 
on the scale of magnitudes proposed by Hopkins (www. 
sport sci. org):  < 0.1,  trivial;  0.1–0.3,  small;  0.3–0.5,  mod-
erate; 0.5–0.7, large; 0.7–0.9, very large; > 0.9, nearly per-
fect, the results (see Table 1) ranged from small (r = 0.24) 
to  nearly  perfect  (r = 0.93)  correlation  between  coaches’ 
and athletes’ rating of exertion, thus showing a large vari-
ation among studies.

Strength and Limitations

Some aspects of this review should be highlighted. First, 
only  cross-sectional  studies  that  investigated  the  differ-
ences  between  the  training  load  perceived  by  athletes 
and  that  prescribed/intended/observed  by  coaches  were 
included.  Although  only  studies  with  this  design  were 
retrieved  in  the  literature  search,  we  considered  this 
aspect  a  limitation  of  this  review.  This  observational 
characteristic does not determine causality. Second, stud-
ies  included  in  this  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis 
were classified as having a low or moderate risk of bias. 
Future studies should report the main confounding vari-
ables  to  improve  internal  validity.  On  the  other  hand, 
Egger’s linear regression analysis did not indicate poten-
tial publication biases that might have significantly influ-
enced the results of overall, easy and hard RPE. However, 
a  potential  publication  bias  was  found  for  RPE  in  the 
moderate category. Despite this, no significant difference 
was observed when comparing RPE between coaches and 
athletes,  with  a  small  effect  size.  For  overall  sRPE  or  in 
the three effort categories (easy, moderate, and hard), no 
potential  publication  biases  were  found  in  the  present 
systematic  review  and  meta-analysis.  The  cutoff  values 
varied  from  study  to  study  regarding  the  categorization 
used (easy, moderate, hard). We consider that familiariz-
ing the instrument and anchoring the descriptors seems 
to  be  more  important  than  the  cutoff  value  used;  there-
fore,  we  believe  that  the  three  effort  categories  did  not 
influence  our  results.  In  addition,  the  3-category  com-
parison  was  used  in  the  various  studies  included  in  this 

review [5, 17–20, 25–34]. Third, the certainty of evidence 
was very low using the GRADE approach, creating a high 
degree of uncertainty in these results. However, it is note-
worthy that observational studies such as those included 
in this review start with low certainty of evidence. Finally, 
a  limitation  of  the  psychometric  scales  directly  influ-
encing results is the use of artifacts in the scales such as 
colors,  verbal  anchors,  or  figures.  Changes  in  the  origi-
nal  scales  could  influence  the  athletes’  responses  and 
the observed results. Thus, coaches and sports scientists 
must  use  the  scales  initially  validated  in  their  original 
format.

Summarizing  this 

is  essential  to  guide 
literature 
coaches’ and sport scientists’ decision-making in training 
programming,  thus  maximizing  adaptive  responses  [6]. 
Any  discrepancies  between  the  program  planned  by  the 
coach and that executed by the athletes can lead to incor-
rect  prescription/execution  of  training  loads,  which  are 
potential causes of the high incidence of negative results 
in sports training [17].

Conclusion
Based  on  the  results  presented,  there  is  an  agreement 
between coaches and athletes about the overall RPE and 
sRPE,  and  RPE  and  sRPE  into  moderate  and  hard  effort 
categories.  However,  we  found  divergences  between  the 
RPE and sRPE prescribed/intended/observed by coaches 
and that perceived by the athletes in the easy effort cate-
gory. Thus, despite a small disagreement, the use of these 
tools seems to be adequate for training monitoring. How-
ever, the certainty of evidence for these results was very 
low.  More  studies  should  be  carried  out  controlling  for 
the risk of bias, imprecision, and confounding factors to 
increase the certainty of evidence. Researchers, coaches, 
and athletes must carefully monitor the internal training 
load, thereby optimizing sports performance, decreasing 
negative  outcomes,  and  ultimately  preventing  athletes 
from developing overtraining.

Abbreviations
RPE: Rating of perceived exertion; sRPE: Session rating of perceived exertion; 
RIE: Rating of intended exertion; ROE: Rating of observed exertion; CR10: 
Category ratio 10 scale; CR100: 100-Point RPE category ratio scale; OMNI: 
Perceived exertion scale; GPS: Global positioning system; PRISMA: Preferred 
reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses; GRADE: Grading of 
recommendations assessment, development and evaluation; SMD: Standard-
ized mean difference; CI: Confidence interval; 95% CI: 95% Confidence interval; 
ES: Effect size; IV: Inverse variance; SD: Standard deviation; mmol/L: Millimoles 
per liter; NR: Not reported; M: Males; F: Females; Yrs: Years; UCI: Union cycliste 
internationale; 1st w: First week; 2nd w: Second week; 3rd w: Third week; PS: 
Physical sessions; SS: Strength sessions; TTS: Tactical-technical sessions; TS: 
Technical sessions; BB: Black belt; WB: White belt; 1kk: 1000 Kicks; 1kp: 1000 
Punches; BC: Beginner coaches; EC: Expert coaches; 1v1: One-a-side game; 
2v2: 2-a-side game; 3v2: Superiority situations game; 5v5: 5-a-side game; 
Pre-S: Pre-season; C1: First competitive period; IC: Intercompetition period; C2: 
Second competitive period.

 Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 30 of 32

Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1186/ s40798- 022- 00420-3.

Additional file 1. Search strategy and Funnel plots.

Acknowledgements
Not applicable

Authors’ contributions
AI and ES designed the research. AI and PB conducted the searches and 
screening. AI and PB extracted the data, which were verified by ES. AI and ES 
performed the statistical analyses. AI drafted the manuscript, and all authors 
(PB, EC, EL and ES) edited and revised the final version of the manuscript. All 
authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding
No sources of funding or financial support were used to assist in the prepara-
tion of this manuscript.

Availability of Data and Materials
Data supporting the findings of this study are available from the correspond-
ing author on request.

Declarations

Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate
Not applicable.

Consent for Publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
Allan Inoue, Priscila dos Santos Bunn, Everton Crivoi do Carmo, Eduardo Lattari 
and Elirez Bezerra da Silva declare that they have no competing interests.

Author details
1 Exercise and Sport Sciences Postgraduate Program, Rio de Janeiro State 
University, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 2 Research Group on Exercise and Health Sci-
ence, Rio de Janeiro State University, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 3 Exercise Sciences 
Research Laboratory, Physical Education Center Admiral Adalberto Nunes 
(CEFAN), Brazilian Navy, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 4 Department of Physical Educa-
tion, Senac University Center, São Paulo, Brazil. 5 Physical Activity Sciences 
Postgraduate Program, Salgado de Oliveira University, Niterói, Brazil. 

Received: 17 August 2021   Accepted: 13 February 2022

References
 1.  Halson SL. Monitoring training load to understand fatigue in athletes. 

Sports Med. 2014;44(Suppl 2):S139-47. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s40279- 
014- 0253-z (Epub 2014/09/10).

 2.  Mujika I. Quantification of training and competition loads in endur-
ance sports: methods and applications. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 
2017;12(Suppl 2):S29–217. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1123/ ijspp. 2016- 0403 (Epub 
2016/12/06).

 3.  McLaren SJ, Macpherson TW, Coutts AJ, Hurst C, Spears IR, Weston M. The 
relationships between internal and external measures of training load 
and intensity in team sports: a meta-analysis. Sports Med. 2018;48(3):641–
58. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s40279- 017- 0830-z (Epub 2017/12/31).
 4.  Meeusen R, Duclos M, Foster C, Fry A, Gleeson M, Nieman D, et al. 

Prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of the overtraining syndrome: 
joint consensus statement of the European College of Sport Science 
and the American College of Sports Medicine. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2013;45(1):186–205. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1249/ MSS. 0b013 e3182 79a10a  
(Epub 2012/12/19).

 5.  Brink MS, Frencken WG, Jordet G, Lemmink KA. Coaches’ and players’ 
perceptions of training dose: not a perfect match. Int J Sports Physiol 
Perform. 2014;9(3):497–502. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1123/ ijspp. 2013- 0009  
(Epub 2013/11/16).
Impellizzeri FM, Marcora SM, Coutts AJ. Internal and external train-
ing load: 15 years on. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2019;14(2):270–3. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1123/ ijspp. 2018- 0935 ( Epub 2019/01/08).

 6. 

 7.  Bourdon PC, Cardinale M, Murray A, Gastin P, Kellmann M, Varley MC, 

 8. 

 9. 

et al. Monitoring athlete training loads: consensus statement. Int J 
Sports Physiol Perform. 2017;12(Suppl 2):S2161–70. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1123/ IJSPP. 2017- 0208 ( Epub 2017/05/04).
Thompson WR. Worldwide survey of fitness trends for 2017. J ACSM’s 
Health Fitness J. 2016;20(6):8–17.
Foster C, Rodriguez-Marroyo JA, de Koning JJ. Monitoring training 
loads: the past, the present, and the future. Int J Sports Physiol Per-
form. 2017;12(Suppl 2):S22–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1123/ ijspp. 2016- 0388  
(Epub 2017/03/03).

 10.  Borresen J, Lambert MI. The quantification of training load, the training 

response and the effect on performance. Sports Med. 2009;39(9):779–
95. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2165/ 11317 780- 00000 0000- 00000 ( Epub 
2009/08/21).

 11.  Manzi V, D’Ottavio S, Impellizzeri FM, Chaouachi A, Chamari K, Castagna 
C. Profile of weekly training load in elite male professional basketball 
players. J Strength Cond Res. 2010;24(5):1399–406. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1519/ JSC. 0b013 e3181 d7552a ( Epub 2010/04/14).

 12.  Coutts AJ. In the age of technology, Occam’s razor still applies. Int J 
Sports Physiol Perform. 2014;9(5):741. doi: https:// doi. org/ 10. 1123/  
IJSPP. 2014- 0353. Epub 2014/08/30.

 13.  Foster C, Boullosa D, McGuigan M, Fusco A, Cortis C, Arney BE, et al. 25 
Years of session rating of perceived exertion: historical perspective and 
development. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2021;16(5):612–21. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1123/ ijspp. 2020- 0599 ( Epub 2021/01/29).

 14.  Haddad M, Stylianides G, Djaoui L, Dellal A, Chamari K. Session-RPE 
method for training load monitoring: validity, ecological usefulness, 
and influencing factors. Front Neurosci. 2017;11:612. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
3389/ fnins. 2017. 00612 ( Epub 2017/11/23).

 15.  Figueiredo DH, Figueiredo DH, de Assis Manoel F, Gonçalves HR, Dour-
ado AC. Coaches’ and young soccer players’ training load perceptions 
during different training phases. Rev Andaluza de Med del Deporte. 
2019;12(4):336–41.

 16.  Redkva PE, Gregorio da Silva S, Paes MR, Dos-Santos JW. The relation-

ship between coach and player training load perceptions in profes-
sional soccer. Percept Mot Skills. 2017;124(1):264–76. doi: https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1177/ 00315 12516 678727. Epub 2016/11/20.

 17.  Foster C, Heimann, Kara M., Esten, Phillip L., Brice, Glen, Porcari JP. 

Differences in perceptions of training by coaches and athletes. S Afr J 
Sports Med. 2001;8(2):3–7.

 18.  Wallace LK, Slattery KM, Coutts AJ. The ecological validity and applica-
tion of the session-RPE method for quantifying training loads in 
swimming. J Strength Cond Res. 2009;23(1):33–8. doi: https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1519/ JSC. 0b013 e3181 874512. Epub 2008/11/13.

 19.  Barnes KR. Comparisons of perceived training doses in champion col-

legiate-level male and female cross-country runners and coaches over 
the course of a competitive season. Sports Med Open. 2017;3(1):38. 
doi: https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s40798- 017- 0105-0. Epub 2017/10/19.
 20.  Rabelo FN, Pasquarelli BN, Goncalves B, Matzenbacher F, Campos FA, 

Sampaio J, et al. Monitoring the intended and perceived training load 
of a professional futsal team over 45 weeks: a case study. J Strength 
Cond Res. 2016;30(1):134–40. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1519/ JSC. 00000 00000  
001090 (Epub 2015/07/23).

 21.  Sanders D, Abt G, Hesselink MKC, Myers T, Akubat I. Methods of moni-
toring training load and their relationships to changes in fitness and 
performance in competitive road cyclists. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 
2017;12(5):668–75. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1123/ ijspp. 2016- 0454 ( Epub 
2017/01/18).

 22.  Foster C. Monitoring training in athletes with reference to overtraining 
syndrome. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1998;30(7):1164–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1097/ 00005 768- 19980 7000- 00023 (Epub 1998/07/15).

 23.  Drew MK, Finch CF. The relationship between training load and injury, 

illness and soreness: a systematic and literature review. Sports Med. 

Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 31 of 32

2016;46(6):861–83. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s40279- 015- 0459-8 (Epub 
2016/01/30).

Human Sci. 1997;16(1):9–13. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2114/ jpa. 16.9 (Epub 
1997/01/01).

 24.  Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG, Group P. Preferred reporting 

 42.  Medina JÁ, Lorente VM. Comparación entre las cargas planificadas 

items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. 
PLoS Med. 2009;6(7):e1000097. doi: https:// doi. org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. 
pmed. 10000 97. Epub 2009/07/22.

y ejecutadas en el entrenamiento de fútbol sala: la doble escala. 
Retos Nuevas tendencias en educación física, deporte y recreación. 
2016;29:48–52.

 25.  Andrade Nogueira FCd, Nogueira RA, Coimbra DR, Miloski B, Freitas 

 43.  Vaquera A, Suarez-Iglesias D, Guiu X, Barroso R, Thomas G, Renfree 

VHd, Bara M. Internal training load: perception of volleyball coaches and 
athletes. Rev Bras Cineantropom Desempenho Hum. 2014;16(6):638–47.

 26.  Barroso R, Cardoso RK, do Carmo EC, Tricoli V. Perceived exertion in 

coaches and young swimmers with different training experience. Int J 
Sports Physiol Perform. 2014;9(2):212–6. doi: https:// doi. org/ 10. 1123/ 
ijspp. 2012- 0356. Epub 2013/05/01.

 28. 

 27.  Cruz R, Fretas JVd, Santos J, Castro PH, Siqueira R, Alves DL, et al. Com-
parison between the RPE planned by coach with perceived by youth 
athletes of track and field. Revista Brasileira de Ciência e Movimento. 
2017;25(1):13–8.
Ieno C, Baldassarre R, Pennacchi M, La Torre A, Bonifazi M, Piacentini MF. 
Monitoring Rating of Perceived Exertion Time in Zone: A novel method to 
quantify training load in elite open-water swimmers? Int J Sports Physiol 
Perform. 2021:1–5. doi: https:// doi. org/ 10. 1123/ ijspp. 2020- 0707. Epub 
2021/03/25.
Inoue A, do Carmo EC, de Souza Terra B, Moraes BR, Lattari E, Borin JP. 
Comparison of coach-athlete perceptions on internal and external train-
ing loads in trained cyclists. Eur J Sport Sci. 2021:1–7. doi: https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1080/ 17461 391. 2021. 19271 98. Epub 2021/05/13.

 29. 

 30.  Kraft JA, Laurent MC, Green JM, Helm J, Roberts C, Holt S. Examination of 
coach and player perceptions of recovery and exertion. J Strength Cond 
Res. 2020;34(5):1383–91. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1519/ JSC. 00000 00000 002538 
(Epub 2018/03/01).

 31.  Nogueira FDA, Nogueira R, Miloski B, Cordeiro A, Werneck F, Bara FM. 
Comparison of the training load intensity planned by the coach with 
the training perceptions of the swimming athletes. Gazz Med Ital. 
2015;174:1–2.

 32.  Scantlebury S, Till K, Sawczuk T, Weakley J, Jones B. Understanding the 

relationship between coach and athlete perceptions of training intensity 
in youth sport. J Strength Cond Res. 2018;32(11):3239–45. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1519/ JSC. 00000 00000 002204 (Epub 2017/10/19).

 33.  Sinnott-O’Connor C, Comyns TM, Warrington GD. Validity of session-rate 
of perceived exertion to quantify training loads in paralympic swimmers. 
J Strength Cond Res. 2021;35(9):2611–5. doi: https:// doi. org/ 10. 1519/ JSC. 
00000 00000 003181. Epub 2019/05/03.

 34.  Voet JG, Lamberts RP, de Koning JJ, de Jong J, Foster C, van Erp T. Differ-

ences in execution and perception of training sessions as experienced by 
(semi-) professional cyclists and their coach. Eur J Sport Sci. 2021:1–9. doi: 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 17461 391. 2021. 19791 02. Epub 2021/09/11.

 35.  Balshem H, Helfand M, Schunemann HJ, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Brozek J, 
et al. GRADE guidelines: 3. Rating the quality of evidence. J Clin Epide-
miol. 2011;64(4):401–6. doi: https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jclin epi. 2010. 07. 015. 
Epub 2011/01/07.

 36.  Cohen J. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Hillsdale: 

Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1988.

 37.  Higgins JP, Thompson SG, Deeks JJ, Altman DG. Measuring inconsistency 

in meta-analyses. BMJ. 2003;327(7414):557–60. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ 
bmj. 327. 7414. 557 (Epub 2003/09/06).

 38.  Barroso R, Salgueiro DF, do Carmo EC, Nakamura FY. The effects of 

training volume and repetition distance on session rating of perceived 
exertion and internal load in swimmers. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 
2015;10(7):848–52. doi: https:// doi. org/ 10. 1123/ ijspp. 2014- 0410. Epub 
2015/02/12.

 39.  Brink MS, Kersten AW, Frencken WGP. Understanding the Mismatch 
between coaches’ and players’ perceptions of exertion. Int J Sports 
Physiol Perform. 2017;12(4):562–8. doi: https:// doi. org/ 10. 1123/ ijspp. 
2016- 0215. Epub 2016/09/13.

 40.  Doeven SH, Brink MS, Frencken WGP, Lemmink K. Impaired player-coach 
perceptions of exertion and recovery during match congestion. Int J 
Sports Physiol Perform. 2017;12(9):1151–6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1123/ ijspp. 
2016- 0363 (Epub 2017/01/18).
Imamura H, Yoshimura Y, Uchida K, Tanaka A, Nishimura S, Nakazawa AT. 
Heart rate, blood lactate responses and ratings of perceived exertion 
to 1000 punches and 1000 kicks in collegiate karate practitioners. Appl 

 41. 

A. Physiological responses to and athlete and coach perceptions of 
exertion during small-sided basketball games. J Strength Cond Res. 
2018;32(10):2949–53. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1519/ JSC. 00000 00000 002012 
(Epub 2017/08/02).

 44.  Andrade AD, de Moura Simim MA, Kassiano W, Andrés JMP, Almeidan 
CDJ, Maia N, et al. Do differences between the training load perceived 
by elite beach volleyball players and that planned by coaches affect 
neuromuscular function? Retos: nuevas tendencias en educación física, 
deporte y recreación. 2020;(38):632–6.

 45.  Lupo C, Ungureanu AN, Frati R, Panichi M, Grillo S, Brustio PR. Player ses-
sion rating of perceived exertion: a more valid tool than coaches’ ratings 
to monitor internal training load in elite youth female basketball. Int J 
Sports Physiol Perform. 2019:1–6. doi: https:// doi. org/ 10. 1123/ ijspp. 2019- 
0248. Epub 2019/11/07.

 46.  Oytun M, Açıkada C, Hazır T, Tınazcı C. Athletes evaluation of training 
loads with different fitness levels in women’s handball. Int J Appl Exer 
Physiol. 2020;9(11):99–107.

 47.  Rodriguez-Marroyo JA, Medina J, Garcia-Lopez J, Garcia-Tormo JV, Foster 
C. Correspondence between training load executed by volleyball players 
and the one observed by coaches. J Strength Cond Res. 2014;28(6):1588–
94. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1519/ JSC. 00000 00000 000324 (Epub 2013/11/28).

 48.  Viveiros L, Costa EC, Moreira A, Nakamura FY, Aoki MS. Monitoramento do 
treinamento no judô: comparação entre a intensidade da carga plane-
jada pelo técnico e a intensidade percebida pelo atleta. Rev Brasileira de 
Med do Esporte. 2011;17:266–9.

 49.  Murphy AP, Duffield R, Kellett A, Reid M. Comparison of athlete-coach 
perceptions of internal and external load markers for elite junior tennis 
training. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2014;9(5):751–6. doi: https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1123/ ijspp 2013- 0364. Epub 2013/11/16.

 50.  Robertson RJ. Perceived exertion for practitioners: rating effort with the 

OMNI picture system. Champaign: Human Kinetics; 2004.

 51.  Gearhart RF, Jr., Becque MD, Hutchins MD, Palm CM. Comparison of 

memory and combined exercise and memory-anchoring procedures on 
ratings of perceived exertion during short duration, near-peak-intensity 
cycle ergometer exercise. Percept Mot Skills. 2004;99(3 Pt 1):775–84. doi: 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 2466/ pms. 99.3. 775- 784. Epub 2005/01/15.

 52.  Paul D, Read P, Farooq A, Jones L. Factors influencing the association 

between coach and athlete rating of exertion: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Sports Med Open. 2021;7(1):1. doi: https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ 
s40798- 020- 00287-2. Epub 2021/01/07.

 53.  McGuigan M. Monitoring training and performance in athletes. Cham-

paign: Human Kinetics; 2017.

 54.  Coyne JOC, Gregory Haff G, Coutts AJ, Newton RU, Nimphius S. The cur-
rent state of subjective training load monitoring-a practical perspective 
and call to action. Sports Med Open. 2018;4(1):58. doi: https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1186/ s40798- 018- 0172-x. Epub 2018/12/21.

 55.  Fanchini M, Ferraresi I, Modena R, Schena F, Coutts AJ, Impellizzeri FM. 

Use of CR100 scale for session rating of perceived exertion in soccer 
and its interchangeability with the CR10. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 
2016;11(3):388–92. doi: https:// doi. org/ 10. 1123/ ijspp. 2015- 0273. Epub 
2015/08/27.

 56.  Clemente FM, Rabbani A, Araujo JP. Ratings of perceived recovery and 

exertion in elite youth soccer players: Interchangeability of 10-point and 
100-point scales. Physiol Behav. 2019;210:112641. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. physb eh. 2019. 112641 (Epub 2019/08/05).

 57.  Miloski B, Moreira A, Andrade FC, Freitas VH, Pecanha T, Nogueira RA, et al. 

Do physical fitness measures influence internal training load responses 
in high-level futsal players? J Sports Med Phys Fitness. 2014;54(5):588–94 
(Epub 2014/10/02).

 58.  Foster C, Florhaug JA, Franklin J, Gottschall L, Hrovatin LA, Parker S, et al. 

A new approach to monitoring exercise training. J Strength Cond Res. 
2001;15(1):109–15 (Epub 2001/11/16).

 Inoue et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:35 

Page 32 of 32

 59.  Mageau GA, Vallerand RJ. The coach-athlete relationship: a motivational 
model. J Sports Sci. 2003;21(11):883–904. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 02640 
41031 00014 0374 (Epub 2003/11/25).

 60.  Jowett S. What makes coaches tick? The impact of coaches’ intrinsic and 
extrinsic motives on their own satisfaction and that of their athletes. 
Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2008;18(5):664–73. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 
1600- 0838. 2007. 00705.x (Epub 2008/01/23).

 61.  Selmi O, Goncalves B, Ouergui I, Levitt DE, Sampaio J, Bouassida A. Influ-

ence of well-being indices and recovery state on the technical and physi-
ological aspects of play during small-sided games. J Strength Cond Res. 
2021;35(10):2802–9. doi: https:// doi. org/ 10. 1519/ JSC. 00000 00000 003228. 
Epub 2019/08/14.

 62.  Kentta G, Hassmen P. Overtraining and recovery: a conceptual model. 
Sports Med. 1998;26(1):1–16. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2165/ 00007 256- 19982 
6010- 00001 (Epub 1998/09/18).

 63.  Robertson RJ, Moyna NM, Sward KL, Millich NB, Goss FL, Thompson PD. 

Gender comparison of RPE at absolute and relative physiological criteria. 
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2000;32(12):2120–9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ 00005 
768- 20001 2000- 00024 (Epub 2000/12/29).

 64.  Garcin M, Fleury A, Mille-Hamard L, Billat V. Sex-related differences in 

ratings of perceived exertion and estimated time limit. Int J Sports 
Med. 2005;26(8):675–81. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1055/s- 2004- 830440 (Epub 
2005/09/15).

 65.  Rascon J, Trujillo E, Morales-AcuNa F, Gurovich AN. Differences between 
males and females in determining exercise intensity. Int J Exerc Sci. 
2020;13(4):1305–16 (Epub 2020/10/13).

 66.  Macpherson TW, McLaren SJ, Gregson W, Lolli L, Drust B, Weston M. Using 
differential ratings of perceived exertion to assess agreement between 
coach and player perceptions of soccer training intensity: an exploratory 
investigation. J Sports Sci. 2019;37(24):2783–8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 
02640 414. 2019. 16534 23 (Epub 2019/08/20).

 67.  Brown DMY, Graham JD, Innes KI, Harris S, Flemington A, Bray SR. Effects 
of prior cognitive exertion on physical performance: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Sports Med. 2020;50(3):497–529. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1007/ s40279- 019- 01204-8 (Epub 2019/12/25).

 68.  Kiely J. Periodization paradigms in the 21st century: evidence-led or 

tradition-driven? Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2012;7(3):242–50. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1123/ ijspp.7. 3. 242 (Epub 2012/02/24).

 69.  Brink MS, Visscher C, Arends S, Zwerver J, Post WJ, Lemmink KA. Monitor-
ing stress and recovery: new insights for the prevention of injuries and ill-
nesses in elite youth soccer players. Br J Sports Med. 2010;44(11):809–15. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bjsm. 2009. 069476 (Epub 2010/06/01).

Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in pub-
lished maps and institutional affiliations.
