---
pmid: 35445953
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/35445953
title: Reverse Periodization for Improving Sports Performance - A Systematic Review.
---

González‑Ravé et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:56  
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40798‑022‑00445‑8

SYSTEMATIC REVIEW

Open Access

Reverse Periodization for Improving Sports 
Performance: A Systematic Review
José M. González‑Ravé1 

, Fernando González‑Mohino1,2*, Víctor Rodrigo‑Carranza1 

 and David B. Pyne3 

Abstract 
Background:  Reverse periodization is commonly touted as a salient planning strategy to improve sport performance 
in athletes, but benefits have not been clearly described.

Objectives:  We sought to identify the main characteristics of reverse periodization, and the influence of training 
volume and periodization models on enhancing physiological measures and sports performance.

Design:  Systematic review.

Methods:  The electronic databases Scopus, PubMed and Web of Science were searched using a comprehensive list 
of relevant terms.

Results:  A total of 925 studies were identified, and after removal of duplicates and studies based on title and abstract 
screening, 17 studies remained, and 11 finally included in the systematic review. There was a total of 200 athletes in 
the included studies. Reverse periodization does not provide superior performance improvements in swimming, run‑
ning, muscular endurance, maximum strength, or maximal oxygen uptake, compared to traditional or block periodi‑
zation. The quality of evidence levels for the reverse periodization studies was 1b (individual randomized controlled 
trial) for two investigations, 2b (individual cohort study) for the remaining studies and a mean of 4.9 points in the 
PEDro scale (range 0–7).

Conclusions:  It appears that reverse periodization is no more effective than other forms of periodization in improv‑
ing sports performance. More comparative studies on this alternative version of periodization are required to verify its 
effectiveness and utility across a range of endurance sports.

Keywords:  Training, Athlete development, Adaptation, Model

Key Points

•  Reverse periodization is no more effective than other 
forms  of  periodization  in  improving  sports  perfor-
mance,  muscular  endurance,  maximum  strength,  or 
maximal oxygen uptake.

•  The use of reverse periodization likely induces simi-
lar  improvements  to  a  traditional  model  in  shorter 
events such as the 100-m swimming event.

*Correspondence:  fernando.GMayoralas@uclm.es
1 Sports Training Laboratory, Faculty of Sports Sciences, University 
of Castilla‑La Mancha, Carlos III Avenue, 45008 Toledo, Spain
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

•  More  comparative  studies  of  periodization  mod-
els  in  endurance  sports  require  careful  planning  of 
experimental design, longer study periods, and where 
appropriate matching of training volumes and inten-
sities.

Introduction
Periodization  is  a  process  that  serves  as  the  macroman-
agement  of  an  athlete’s  training  program  in  the  context 
of  the  annual  plan  [1,  2].  Matveyev’s  original  model  of 
periodization  was  developed  through  monitoring  of 
Soviet  athletes  preparing  for  the  1952  and  1956  Olym-
pic  Games  [3].  Periodization  continues  to  be  a  valid 

© The Author(s) 2022. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which 
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the 
original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or 
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory 
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this 
licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.

 
González‑Ravé et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:56 

Page 2 of 14

and  reliable  model  for  athletes  and  is  the  predominant 
training  methodology  used  in  individual  sports  such  as 
swimming  [4–6].  However,  prior  to  Matveyev’s  seminal 
contribution  to  the  topic,  there  was  foundational  work 
that  underpins  the  theory  of  periodization  [3,  7–9].  A 
large number of authors have conceptualized periodized 
training  in  various  models,  with  different  variations  of 
the  underlying  training  process,  planning,  progressions 
in  training  volume  and  intensity,  and  recovery  [10–12]. 
The  original  concept  of  periodization  was  proposed  ini-
tially by Boris Kotov in his book “Olympic Sport” in 1916; 
later, Pihkala [13] postulated a number of principles such 
as dividing the annual cycle into preparatory, spring and 
summer  phases,  and  active  rest  ending  the  season  [14]. 
These  authors  have  conceptualized  various  approaches 
without  an  accepted  formal  definition  of  periodization 
as promulgated by Kataoka et al. [1]. The term Periodiza-
tion was originally employed to describe programs taking 
the  form  of  predetermined  sequential  chains  of  specifi-
cally  focused  training  periods.  Periodization  is  a  cycli-
cal  method  of  training,  where  the  removal  of  linearity, 
and  appropriate  variation  in  the  form  of  repeating  load 
oscillations,  can  provide  a  superior  method  of  training 
as  Stone  et  al.  identify  in  their  recent  (and  provocative) 
narrative  review  [11].  Kiely  [12]  asserts  the  term  perio-
dization  is  frequently  engaged  to  describe  any  form  of 
training plan, regardless of structure. The challenge is to 
provide  evidence-based  guidelines  on  periodization  that 
meet the conceptual and practical requirements of a wide 
variety of sports and events.

The  rationale  of  periodized  models  of  strength  and 
power  training  in  athletes  originated  in  western  coun-
tries  centering  on  the  work  of  Stone  and  O´Bryant 
[15],  Stone  and  O’Bryant  [16]  and  Fleck  [17]. The  mod-
els  from  Verkhoshansky  or  Bondarchuck  have  become 
known in Europe for their translations to different Euro-
pean  languages  such  as  Italian  [18],  Spanish  [19],  Ger-
man  [20]  and  also  English.  It  soon  became  apparent 
that  coaches  and  athletes  needed  to  examine  different 
periodized models other than traditional strength/power 
approaches. Subsequently, the meta-analysis of Rhea and 
Alderman [21] concluded that strength training periodi-
zation is more effective than non-periodized models for 
men and women. This conclusion was based on compar-
ing  different  programming  strategies  after  controlling 
the different parameters of workload (i.e., volume, inten-
sity,  frequency).  Similar  outcomes  were  evident  in  the 
review  of  Hartman  et  al.  [22]  who  evaluated  the  effects 
of different short-term periodization models on strength 
and  speed–strength  training,  with  subjects  of  different 
performance  levels  and  sports,  who  used  a  particular 
periodization  model  during  the  off-season,  pre-season 
and/or  in-season  conditioning.  From  the  early  works  of 

Matveyev  [23],  based  on  the  general  concept  of  perio-
dized training proposed in the 1960s, the strength–speed 
model has been adopted by many generations of analysts 
and coaches [10, 24].

Over  recent  decades,  many  approaches  have  evolved 
that  can  be  broadly  categorized  as  traditional,  block,  or 
reverse  periodization,  each  offering  a  differing  rationale 
and template for subdivision of the training program into 
sequential  elements.  Bompa  [25]  classified  the  periodi-
zation  in  mono-,bi-,  and  tri-cycle  with  different  models 
from different authors on each: Matveyev Ozolin, Bond-
archuck,  Tschiene  [5].  Stone  et  al.  [11]  contend  that 
periodization  can  take  different  forms  including  reverse 
periodization, where in contrast to traditional periodiza-
tion,  high-intensity  low-volume  training  predominates 
during  the  preparatory  period,  before  the  volume  is 
increased slightly, and intensity is maintained as the sea-
son  progresses.  Coaches  and  researchers  have  reversed 
the traditional order of volume and intensity (and there-
fore programming) of phases to yield different physiolog-
ical  and  performance  outcomes,  sometimes  subtle,  but 
nevertheless different to traditional models [11]. Reverse 
periodization has received attention in both the coaching 
and scientific literature, especially in swimming [26, 27], 
and  other  endurance-oriented  sports  such  as  athletics 
or  triathlon  [28,  29].  Incorporating  a  higher  proportion 
of  high-intensity  training  early  in  the  season  is  thought 
to  stimulate  physiological  and  performance  adaptations. 
Reverse periodization has been used in combination with 
a  polarized  intensity  distribution  for  improving  sprint 
events  in  swimming  [30].  However,  a  small  number  of 
relevant  studies  in  swimming  have  not  reported  any 
substantial  differences  between  traditional  and  reverse 
periodization  models  in  enhancing  50-m  performance, 
with a modest improvement of 1% in 100-m performance 
in both forms [27, 31]. A polarized three zone model of 
training  is  another  approach  characterized  by  cover-
ing ~ 80%  of  the  volume  in  zone  1  (blood  lactate   [La−]
b ≤ 2  mmol   L−1)  with  most  of  the  remaining  20%  con-
ducted in zone 3 (above velocity of 4 mmol  L−1) [32, 33]. 
Reverse periodization has been evaluated in youth swim-
mers  [26,  34],  moderately  trained  runners  [28,  35],  rec-
reational triathletes [29] and female fitness athletes [36].

All periodized models (traditional, blocks and reverse) 
can be considered a useful means of coordinating train-
ing  to  improve  human  sporting  performance.  However, 
more research is needed to provide a better understand-
ing  of  the  benefits  of  reverse  training  periodization  in 
comparison with other models. The aim of this study was 
to conduct a systematic review of periodization studies to 
evaluate  the  effectiveness  and  utility  of  reverse  periodi-
zation, and the influence of training volume/intensity in 
enhancing sports performance.

González‑Ravé et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:56 

Page 3 of 14

Methods
Search Strategy

A literature search was completed in December 2021 by 
two independent researchers (VR-C and JM-G) using the 
three  industry-standard  databases  with  no  date  restric-
tions:  PubMed,  Web  of  Science  and  Scopus.  The  search 
strategy consisted of identifying the relevant studies, with 
all  terms  searched  in  the  title,  abstract  and  keywords 
(where applicable).This systematic review was conducted 
following the guidelines of the Preferred Reporting Items 
for  Systematic  reviews  and  Meta-Analyses  (PRISMA) 
statement [37].

The  keywords  used  in  the  searches  were:  periodiza-
tion, training, reverse, linear traditional and block. Title, 
abstract and keyword fields were searched using the fol-
lowing  search  strategy:  ((("periodization"  OR  "Train-
ing") AND "reverse") AND ("linear" OR "traditional" OR 
"block")).

Following  the  literature  search,  the  identification, 
screening,  eligibility  assessments  and  inclusion  of  stud-
ies  were  performed  by  the  same  researchers  with  disa-
greement  settled  by  consensus.  All  duplicate  references 
were  removed,  and  remaining  records  examined  by  title 
and  abstract  to  exclude  irrelevant  records.  Studies  were 
then  selected  following  the  eligibility  criteria  (Table  1). 
Descriptive  data  including  publication  details,  modal-
ity,  participant  characteristics,  study  design,  description 
of  methods  and  results,  were  extracted  from  all  eligible 
studies.  If  insufficient  information  was  reported  for  any 
particular  study,  the  authors  were  contacted  to  confirm 
the relevant details required.

Inclusion Criteria

The  summary  of  eligibility  criteria  is  shown  in  Table  1. 
Studies  were  deemed  eligible  for  further  analysis  if  the 

following inclusion criteria were met: (1) when published 
in  English  language,  (2)  published  in  a  peer-reviewed 
journal,  (3)  analyzed  the  effects  of  reverse  periodization 
vs other type of periodization model, (4) involved at least 
8  weeks  of  training  intervention/analysis,  (5)  provided 
training  zones,  volumes  and/or  periodization  details 
and (6) involved participants without a current injury or 
disability.

Type of Participants

The level of the sample was classified as recreational and 
trained athletes using the criteria of each study included 
in the systematic review.

Data Extraction

Two  of  the  authors  (VR-C  and  JG-R)  independently 
extracted characteristics of training protocols and results 
using  a  standardized  form.  A  total  of  11  studies  were 
identified (Fig. 1). 

Quality Assessment

Two  independent  reviewers  (VR-C  and  FG-M)  ana-
lyzed  the  quality  of  included  studies  using  the  modi-
fied  PEDro  scale  [38]  and  Oxford  Levels  of  Evidence 
[39]  (Table  2).  The  classic  PEDro  scale  consists  of  11 
items  to  assess  scientific  rigor.  A  score  of ≥ 6  repre-
sents  the  threshold  for  studies  with  a  low  risk  of  bias 
[40].  Item  1  is  rated  as  Yes/No,  while  Items  2–11  are 
scored  as  0  (absent)  or  1  (present),  and  a  score  out  of 
10  is  obtained  by  summation.  Given  that  the  assessors 
are  rarely  blinded,  and  that  it  is  impossible  to  blind 
the  participants  and  investigators  in  supervised  exer-
cise  interventions  for  elite  athletes,  the  items  related 
to  blinding  (5–7)  were  removed  from  the  scale  for  the 
purpose  of  this  review.  The  maximum  result  on  the 

Table 1  Summary  of  eligibility  criteria  of  studies  comparing  reverse  linear  periodization  with  traditional  and  block  periodization 
training approach for recreational and trained athletes

Criterion

Type of participant

Type of intervention

 Methodology

 Training intervention

Type of outcome measure

 Periodization

 Type of outcome

Type of study

Publication status

Publication date

Description

Healthy adult and younger distance runners, swimmers and triathletes

Effects of reverse periodization vs other type of periodization training

At least 8 weeks

Training zones, volumes and/or periodization details

At least performance, physiological and anthropometric variables were evaluated

Experimental design

Peer‑reviewed journal publication

Publication date did not form part of the eligibility criteria

Language of publication

English language publication

 González‑Ravé et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:56 

Page 4 of 14

Fig. 1  PRISMA flow diagram of the process used in selection of the journal articles included in the systematic review with the content of this article

modified  PEDro  8-point  scale  was  7,  as  the  first  item 
was not included in the total score, resulting in a maxi-
mum score of 7 instead of 10, with adjusted quality rat-
ings  ranging  from  6  to  7  deemed  “excellent”,  5  “good”, 
4  “moderate”  and  0–3  “poor”  [38].  Oxford  Level  of 

Evidence [39] scores range from 1a to 5, with 1a a sys-
tematic  review  of  high-quality  randomized  controlled 
trials, and 5 an expert opinion.

González‑Ravé et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:56 

Page 5 of 14

Table 2  PEDro ratings and Level of Evidence of the included studies

Study

PEDro ratings

Arroyo‑Toledo et al. [26]

Clemente‑Suarez et al. [27]

Bradbury et al. [28]

Clemente‑Suarez et al. [29]

Clemente‑Suarez et al. [31]

Arroyo‑Toledo et al. [34]

Gómez Martín et al. [35]

Prestes et al. [36]

Clemente‑Suarez et al. [41]

Clemente‑Suárez et al. [43]

Rhea et al. [42]

1

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

2

0

1

1

1

0

0

1

1

0

1

1

3

0

0

1

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

4

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

5

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

6

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

7

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

8

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

Total

Oxford 
Level of 
Evidence

4

5

6

6

4

4

5

6

4

5

5

2b

1b

2b

2b

1b

2b

2b

2b

2b

2b

2b

 eligibility criteria were specified; 2 

Items in the PEDro scale: 1 
similar at baseline regarding the most important prognostic indicators; 5 
groups; 6 
at least 1 key outcome were analyzed by "intention to treat"; 7 
study provides both point measures and measures of variability for at least 1 key outcome

=

=

=

=

=

 all subjects for whom outcome measures were available received the treatment or control condition as allocated or, where this was not the case, data for 
 the 

 the results of between‑group statistical comparison are reported for at least 1 key outcome; 8 

 subjects were randomly allocated to groups; 3 

 the groups were 
 measures of 1 key outcome were obtained from 95% of subjects initially allocated to 

 allocation was concealed; 4 

=

=

=

Results
Final Study Selection

A total of 925 potential manuscripts were identified fol-
lowing  database  examination  (Fig.  1).  References  list  of 
selected  manuscripts  were  also  examined  for  any  other 
potentially eligible manuscripts. Following this examina-
tion, 3 potential manuscripts were added. After removal 
of duplicates and elimination of papers based on title and 
abstract  screening,  17  studies  remained.  Only  11  out  of 
17 studies met the inclusion criteria and were, therefore, 
included in the systematic review (Fig. 1).

Characteristics of the Studies Selected

In terms of the quality of the studies selected, all studies 
were evaluated with the PEDro scale, with a mean score 
of 4.91 (Table 2). Using the Oxford Level of Evidence, two 
studies  [27,  31]  were  classified  as  1b  (independent  ran-
domized  controlled  trial),  while  the  remaining  studies 
[26,  28,  29,  34–36,  41–43]  were  deemed  as  2b  (individ-
ual cohort study) level. The characteristics of the studies 
selected are presented in Table 3. A total of 11 interven-
tion studies met all the inclusion requirements. Five stud-
ies performed reverse periodization in swimming [26, 27, 
31,  34,  41],  two  studies  in  strength  training  [36,  42,  43], 
three  studies  in  running  [28,  35,  43]  and  one  in  triath-
lon  [29].  Two  of  the  studies  compared  block  periodiza-
tion  and  reverse  periodization  models  [26,  35],  whereas 
9 studies compared traditional periodization and reverse 
periodization models [27–29, 31, 34, 36, 41–43].

Six studies were conducted in mostly recreational ath-
letes  and  five  in  trained  athletes.  There  were  a  total  of 
230  athletes  in  the  included  studies,  involving  a  total  of 

134 females (58%). The mean age of the athletes was 23 y 
(standard deviation of 6 y), with a range of 16–37 y. Two 
of the studies assessed females only, nine studies involved 
both males and females, and none of the studies assessed 
males  only.  In  addition,  only  two  studies  used  a  con-
trol  group  to  evaluate  periodization  models  during  the 
experimental intervention. The training programs evalu-
ated in this review were predominantly short-term inter-
ventions  [26,  27,  29,  31,  41,  43]  lasting ~ 10  weeks,  and 
only four studies had a duration equal to or greater than 
12 weeks [28, 34–36]. The mean duration of the training 
interventions  was  11.5 ± 1.  5  weeks.  One  of  the  studies 
was  8  weeks,  five  were  10  weeks,  three  were  12  weeks, 
one  was  14  weeks  and  one  was  of  15  weeks’  duration. 
All  studies  except  that  of  Clemente-Suárez  and  Ramos-
Campo [29] provided quantitative details of the training 
volume, and all studies except that of Rhea et al. [42] and 
Bradbury et al. [28] provided the training intensity of the 
training intervention. In addition, the study of Clemente-
Suárez  and  Ramos-Campo  [29]  and  Clemente-Suarez 
et al. [43] provided the training load in training impulse 
(TRIMPS) units.

Three  typical  patterns  detailing  the  distribution  of 
training intensity in a macrocycle - traditional periodi-
zation,  block  periodization  and  reverse  periodization  - 
are  illustrated  in  Fig.  2.  Training  intensity  distribution 
(TID) was shown only in six studies. Traditional perio-
dization was characterized by programming that used a 
pyramidal  TID  (characterized  by  a  decreasing  training 
volume in zones 1, 2 and 3 [80%) of the volume is con-
ducted in z1, and the remaining 20% in Z2 and Z3]) in 
the  studies  of  Arroyo-Toledo  et  al.  [34]  and  polarized 

 González‑Ravé et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:56 

Page 6 of 14

.

s
p
u
o
r
g
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

l

a
n
o
i
t
i
d
a
r
t

d
n
a
e
s
r
e
v
e
r
d
n
a
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

l

a
s
a
b
e
h
T

.

e
t
a
r

t
r
a
e
h
d
e
n
a
t

i

i

t
n
a
c
fi
n
g
i
s
d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
R
H

e
e
r
f

n
e
e
w
t
e
b
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
ff
d

i

,

e
t
a
r

t
r
a
e
h
n

i

e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d

i

‑
n
a
m
T
F
d
n
a
P
T
e

l
i

h
w

e
c
n
a
m
r
o

f
r
e
p

a
d
e
c
u
d
o
r
p
P
R

.

e
c
n
a
m

l

a
i
r
t
e
m

i
t

m
‑
0
0
0
2
d
n
a

i

y
l
t
n
a
c
fi
n
g
i
s
a
d
e
w
o
h
s
P
R

h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
a
v
i
t
o
m

r
e
h
g
h

i

.

T
F
d
n
a
P
T
n
a
h
t
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

o
t
e
c
n
e
r
e
h
d
a
g
n
d
r
a
g
e
R

i

,

s

m
a
r
g
o
r
p
g
n
n
a
r
t
e
h
t

i

i

i

t
n
a
c
fi
n
g
i
s
o
n
e
r
e
w
e
r
e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
ff
d

i

s
p
u
o
r
g

I

S
P
M
R
T
0
4
7
2

,

t
r
a
e
h

,

x
a
m
2
O
 V
t
a
d
e
e
p
s

d
n
a
1
T
 V
d
n
a
2
T
 V
t
a
e
t
a
r

,

x
a
m
2
O
 V
d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

P
R

e
c
n
a
m
r
o

i

f
r
e
p
c
b
o
r
e
a
n
a

‑
c
e

l
l

l

o
c
e
p
m
a
s
d
o
o
B

l

,
t
s
e
t

i

t
n
i
r
p
s
c
b
o
r
e
a
n
a

d
e
s
a
b
‑
g
n
n
n
u
r

i

,

n
o
i
t

o
t

t
s
e
t

l

a
t
n
e
m
e
r
c
n

i

x
a
m
2
O
 V
t
a
d
e
e
p
s

,

x
a
m
2
O
 V

.

2
T
 V
t
a
e
t
a
r

t
r
a
e
h
d
n
a

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

f

o
s
e
p
y
t
h
t
o
B

i

i

d
e
n
a
t
n
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
d
o
i
r
e
p

e
c
n
a
m
r
o

f
r
e
p
g
n
n
n
u
r

i

d
n
a
s
e
u
a
v

l

l

i

l

a
c
g
o
o
t
a
m
e
h

p
m
u

j

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

y
l
t
n
e
d
v
e

i

e
c
n
a
m
r
o

f
r
e
p

m
0
0
0
5
n

i

e
c
n
a
m
r
o

f
r
e
p

s
s
a
m
y
d
o
b

(

s
t
n
e
m
e
r
u

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

P
R
d
n
a
P
T

‑
s
a
e
m
c
i
r
t
e
m
o
p
o
r
h
t
n
A

o
N

.

G
C
e
h
t
o
t
d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c

‑
d
a
e
r
t

i

l

f

,
)
s
d
o
n
k
s
8
d
n
a

P.
R
d
n
a
P
T
e
h
t
n
e
e
w
t
e
b

n

i

s
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

r
a

l
i

m
S

i

d
n
a
h
/
m
k
9
t
a
y
m
o
n
o
c
E

i

g
n
n
n
u
R
d
n
a
k
a
e
p
2
O
 V

P
T
n
e
e
w
t
e
b
h
/
m
k
1
1

P
R
d
n
a

i

d
e
fi
d
o
m
p
u
o
r
g

f

o
e
n
o
N

‑
r
o

f
r
e
p
g
n
n
n
u
r

i

r
i
e
h
t

i

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
ff
d
t
n
a
c
fi
n
g
i
s

i

,

x
a
m
2
O
 V
d
n
a
y
m
o
n
o
c
e

l

a
i
r
t
e
m

i
t

m
‑
0
0
0
5
a
d
n
a

i

g
n
n
n
u
r

r
o

f

s
t
s
e
t

l
l
i

m

e
c
n
a
m
r
o

f
r
e
p

,

l

e
a
c
s
n
o
i
t
a
v
i
t
o
M

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

f

o
e
c
n
e
r
e
h
d
a

,
t
s
e
t

i

t
n
i
r
p
s
c
b
o
r
e
a
n
a

t
n
e
m
e
v
o
m
r
e
t
n
u
o
c

,
l
l
i

m

d
e
s
a
b
‑
g
n
n
n
u
r
a
n

i

i

‑
d
a
e
r
t
a
n
o
n
o
i
t
s
u
a
h
x
e

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

P
B
e

l
i

h
w

,

m
‑
0
0
0
0
1
d
n
a
p
m
u

j

–

m
0
9
0
5
9
2

,

s
k
e
e
w
2
1

‑
n
u
r

r
a
e
y
‑
2
n
a
h
t
e
r
o
M

a
d
n
a
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
g
n
n

i

t
s
e
b

l

a
n
o
s
r
e
p
m
‑
0
0
0
5

i

n
m
5
2
n
a
h
t

s
s
e

l

I

S
P
M
R
T
1
4
7
2

,

s
k
e
e
w
8

l

s
e
t
e
h
t
a
i
r
t

r
u
e
t
a
m
A

–

m
0
0
7
2
0
3

,

)
3
/
8
(
1
1

2
9

.

±

.

0
7
3

4
7

.

±

.

2
5
2

)
3
/
8
(
1
1

±

)
4
/
4
(
8

±

±

4
7

.

.

2
5
2

)
3
/
0
1
(
3
1

6
9

.

.

2
8
2

)
0
1
/
0
2
(
0
3

7
3

.

±

.

5
5
2

P
B

P
R

i

g
n
n
n
u
R

]
5
3
[

.
l

a
t
e
n
í
t
r
a
M
z
e
m
ó
G

P
T

i

g
n
n
n
u
R

]
8
2
[

.
l

a
t
e
y
r
u
b
d
a
r
B

P
R

G
C

P
T

i

g
n
n
n
u
R

.
l

a
t
e
z
e
r
á
u
S
‑
e
t
n
e
m
e
C

l

]
3
4
[

P
R

n

i

%
3
2

,

1
Z
n

i

%
0
6

3
Z
n

i

%
6
1
d
n
a
2
Z

n

i

%
3
2

,

1
Z
n

i

%
0
6

3
Z
%
8
1
d
n
a
2
Z

i

n
m
6
4
2
3

t
a
g
n
i
t
e
p
m
o
c

;

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
n
d
n
a

l

a
n
o
g
e
r

i

s
e
c
a
r
n
o
h
t
a
r
a
m

‑
f
l
a
h

d
n
a
m
k
0
1
n

i

l

e
v
e

l

i

n
m
0
2
d
n
a
h
5
5

s
k
e
e
w
2
1

f

o
s
r
a
e
y
6
n
a
h
t
e
r
o
M

)
4
/
4
(
8

i

g
n
n
n
u
r
n
o
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

7
5

.

.

2
7
3

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

I

e
m
u
o
V

l

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
D

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
E

)
F
/
M

(
n

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
d
o
i
r
e
p
f
o
e
p
y
T

y
t
i
l
a
d
o
M

y
d
u
t
S

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
e
c
n
a
m
r
o

f
r
e
p
d
n
a

l

i

l

a
c
g
o
o
i
s
y
h
p
n
o
s
e
t
e
h
t
a
d
e
n
a
r
t
n

l

i

i

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
d
o
i
r
e
p
e
fi
d
o
m
k
c
o
b
d
n
a

l

i

l

a
n
o
i
t
i
d
a
r
t

,

e
s
r
e
v
e
r
g
n
i
r
a
p
m
o
c
s
e
d
u
t
s

i

f

o
s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
C

3
e
l
b
a
T

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
González‑Ravé et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:56 

Page 7 of 14

l

s
e
u
a
v
P
T
h
t
i

w
d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c

e
g
r
a
h
c
g
a
r
d

l

i

a
m
x
a
m

e
g
r
a
h
c
g
a
r
d

l

i

a
m
x
a
m

d
n
a
r
e
w
o
p
m
w
s
c
fi
c
e
p
s

i

i

,

e
c
n
a
m
r
o

i

f
r
e
p
g
n
m
m
w
s

i

d
n
a
r
e
w
o
p
m
w
s
c
fi
c
e
p
s

i

i

e
k
o
r
t
s
d
n
a
e
c
n
a
m
r
o

f
r
e
p

,

e
k
o
r
t
s

r
e
p
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d

,

e
t
a
r

3
Z
n

i

%
4
d
n
a
2
Z

e
g
a
r
e
v
a
h
t
i

w
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

a
r
o

f

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

f

o
s
r
a
e
y
5

n
o
i
t
i
t
e
p
m
o
c

6
0

.

±

2
0
6
1

.

‑
c
e
ff
e
n
a
s
a
w
P
T
d
n
a
P
R

t
r
a
e
h

,

n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p
m
o
c
y
d
o
B

e
v
o
r
p
m

i

o
t
y
g
e
t
a
r
t
s
e
v
i
t

‑

i

m
w
s

,

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
i
r
a
v
e
t
a
r

I

S
P
M
R
T
4
5
7
7
3

,

s
k
e
e
w
0
1

r
a
e
y
1
n
a
h
t
e
r
o
M

n
o
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
f

o

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

I

e
m
u
o
V

l

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
D

I

S
P
M
R
T
0
1
6
1

,

e
c
n
a
m
r
o

f
r
e
p
g
n
n
n
u
r

i

‑
n
o
z
i
r
o
h

l

i

a
m
x
a
m
g
n
m

i

,

;

i

i

g
n
n
a
r
t
n
o
h
t
a
i
r
t

l

‑
l
i

b
a

l

i

a
c
n
h
c
e
t
g
n
m
m
w
s

i

i

l

d
o
o
b
d
n
a
e
c
n
a
m
r
o

f
r
e
p

t
a
g
n
i
t
e
p
m
o
c

;

,

l

s
e
b
a
i
r
a
v

l

i

l

a
c
g
o
o
i
s
y
h
p

i

g
n
n
n
u
r
d
n
a
p
m
u

j

l

a
t

i

/
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

f

o
h
5
1

.

±

k
e
e
w

0
7

.

i

c
b
o
r
e
a
n
a
d
n
a
c
b
o
r
e
a

i

,

y
t
i

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c
e
t
a
t
c
a

l

l

e
v
e

l

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
n

i

y
l
t
n
e
c
ffi
e
P
R

.

n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p
m
o
c

p
m
u

j

l

a
t
n
o
z
i
r
o
h
s
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

y
d
o
b
y
f
i

d
o
m

i

t
o
n
d
d
t
u
b

d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c
e
c
n
a
m
r
o

f
r
e
p

P
T
h
t
i

w

.
t
s
e
t

m
‑
0
5
e
h
t
n

i

e
c
n
a
m

s
p
u
o
r
g
h
t
o
b

,
r
e
v
e
w
o
H

‑
r
o

f
r
e
p
r
i
e
h
t
d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

s
p
u
o
r
g
e
h
t

f

o
e
n
o
N

t
r
a
e
h
n

i

s
e
g
n
a
h
c
d
e
t
i
b
h
x
e

i

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
i
r
a
v
e
t
a
r

,

e
c
n
a
m
r
o

i

f
r
e
p
g
n
m
m
w
s

i

i

g
n
m
m
w
s

i

m
0
5
d
n
a

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
r
c
m
o
n
o
t
u
A

i

)
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
i
r
a
v
e
t
a
r

t
r
a
e
h

(

I

S
P
M
R
T
3
9
6
7
3

,

I

S
P
M
R
T
6
9
4
1
1

,

e
c
n
a
m
r
o

f
r
e
p

n

i

%
1
1

,

1
Z
n

i

%
0
4

3
Z
n

i

%
8
4
d
n
a
2
Z

m
0
0
0
7
3
3

,

s
k
e
e
w
0
1

i

‑
n
a
r
t

f

o
s
r
a
e
y
9
4

.

5
6

.

d
e
t
e
p
m
o
c
m
e
h
t

f

o

l
l

a

l

e
v
e

l

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
n
e
h
t

e
h
t

f

o
e
m

i
t
e
h
t

t
a

t
a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
n
a
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
g
n

i

±

s
s
a
m
e
e
r
f
‑
t
a
f

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

P
B

e
c
n
a
m
r
o

f
r
e
p

i

i

g
n
n
a
r
t
g
n
m
m
w
s
n

i

i

i

t
a
f
y
d
o
b
d
n
a
s
s
a
m

t
a
f

n

i

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

m
0
0
1
d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

P
R

l

s
e
u
a
v
g
n
c
u
d
e
r
e

i

l
i

h
w

i

g
n
m
m
w
s

i

n

i

%
1
3

,

1
Z
n

i

%
0
6

3
Z
n

i

%
9
d
n
a
2
Z

m
0
0
0
0
9

,

m
0
0
1

n

i

%
5
2

,

1
Z
n

i

%
0
7

m
0
0
0
4
2
3

,

s
k
e
e
w
4
1

e
v
i
t
i
t
e
p
m
o
c

l

i

a
n
o
g
e
R

i

g
n
c
i
t
c
a
r
p
h
t
i

w
d
n
a

e
e
r
h
t
n
a
h
t
e
r
o
m

t
o
n

k
e
e
w

r
e
p
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

l

y
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
h
t
i

w
d
n
a

f

o
s
l
e
v
e

l

d
e
n
a
r
t

i

n
o
i
t
i
t
e
p
m
o
c

.

e
c
n
a
m
r
o

i

f
r
e
p
g
n
m
m
w
s

i

i

g
n
m
m
w
s

i

l

w
a
r
c
m
0
0
1

3
Z
n

i

%
9
d
n
a
2
Z

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
u
o
v
e
r
p

i

f

o

m
0
0
1
d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

P
R

d
n
a
n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p
m
o
C
y
d
o
B

n

i

%
1
3

,

1
Z
n

i

%
0
6

m
0
0
0
0
9

,

s
k
e
e
w
0
1

s
r
a
e
y
6
d
n
a
4
n
e
e
w
t
e
B

n

i

%
2
3

,

1
Z
n

i

%
5
3

3
Z
n

i

%
3
3
d
n
a
2
Z

m
0
0
0
9
5
1

,

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

6
9

.

±

.

2
8
2

3
1

8
6

.

4
3

.

±

±

.

6
5
2

1
1

.

9
5
8 2

9
1

.

±

.

9
7
1

)
3
/
4
(
7

)
5
/
5
(
0
1

±

2
3

.

.

5
7
1

)
0
1
/
0
(
0
1

1
1

.

±

.

3
6
1

)
0
1
/
0
(
0
1

0
1

.

.

6
5
1

±

)
5
/
7
(
3
1

T
F

P
T

P
R

G
C

P
T

P
R

P
B

P
R

P
T

l

n
o
h
t
a
i
r
T

d
n
a
z
e
r
á
u
S
‑
e
t
n
e
m
e
C

l

]
9
2
[

o
p
m
a
C
‑
s
o
m
a
R

i

g
n
m
m
w
S

i

i

g
n
m
m
w
S

i

i

g
n
m
m
w
S

i

.
l

a
t
e
z
e
r
á
u
S
‑
e
t
n
e
m
e
C

l

]
1
3
[

]
6
2
[

.
l

l

a
t
e
o
d
e
o
T
‑
o
y
o
r
r
A

]
4
3
[

.
l

l

a
t
e
o
d
e
o
T
‑
o
y
o
r
r
A

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
E

)
F
/
M

(
n

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
d
o
i
r
e
p
f
o
e
p
y
T

y
t
i
l
a
d
o
M

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

3
e
l
b
a
T

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
González‑Ravé et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:56 

Page 8 of 14

y
g
r
e
n
e

,

i

c
b
o
r
e
a
n
a

,

i

c
b
o
r
e
a

e
h
t

,

l

d
o
h
s
e
r
h
t
c
b
o
r
e
a

i

n

i

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

l

y
n
o
e
r
e
w

s
e
i
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

i

g
n
m
m
w
s

i

f

o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p
e
h
T
P.
T

i

e
h
t
o
t
g
n
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
r
o
c

t
s
o
c
y
g
r
e
n
e

,

e
r
u
t
i
d
n
e
p
x
e

‑

i

m
w
s
d
n
a
x
a
m
2
O
V
 v
t
a

i

r
e
t
l
a
t
o
n
d
d
y
t
i
c
o
e
v
g
n
m

l

i

l

d
n
a
d
o
h
s
e
r
h
t
c
b
o
r
e
a
n
a

i

l

i

a
m
x
a
m

t
a
y
t
i
c
o
e
v
e
h
t

l

e
k
a
t
p
u
n
e
g
y
x
o

s
p
u
o
r
g
h
t
o
b
n

i

n

i

%
9
7

.

,

1
Z
n

i

%
4
8

3
Z
n

i

.

%
1
8
d
n
a
2
Z

m
0
2
0
9
5
1

,

d
n
a
d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

x
e
d
n

i

e
k
o
r
t
S

g
n
i
t
i
c

i
l

e
y
t
i
c
o
e
V

l

n

i

%
5
2

.

,

1
Z
n

i

%
7
8

m
0
0
1
7
3
3

,

s
k
e
e
w
0
1

f

o
s
r
a
e
y
9
4

.

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

I

e
m
u
o
V

l

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
D

.

%
0
9
7
1
d
n
a
2
Z
n

i

%
3
3

,

1
Z
n

i

%
9
4

3
Z
n

i

m
0
0
0
2
1
2

,

P.
T
n

i

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d
x
a
m
2
O
V
 v

x
a
m
2
O
 V
e
h
t
d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

P
R

e
t
a
t
c
a

l

d
o
o
b

l

,

e
t
a
r

t
r
a
e
h

s
e
k
o
r
t
s

,

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

,

n
o
i
t
r
e
x
e
d
e
v
e
c
r
e
p

i

f

o

e
t
a
r

,

e
k
a
t
p
u
n
e
g
y
x
o

l

i

a
m
x
a
m

,
l
/
l
o
m
m
4

t
a
E
P
L
R
d
n
a
e
t
a
r
e
k
o
r
t
s

f

o
e
t
a
t
c
a

l

l

d
o
o
b
e
h
t

3
Z
n

i

%
0
1
d
n
a
2
Z

t
s
o
c
y
g
r
e
n
e
d
n
a
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

l

d
o
h
s
e
r
h
t
c
b
o
r
e
a
n
a

i

e
h
t

t
a

,
t
s
a
r
t
n
o
c
n

I

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

s
p
u
o
r
g
h
t
o
B

.

i

y
g
r
e
n
e
c
b
o
r
e
a
n
a
%

i

c
b
o
r
e
a
f

o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

i

y
g
r
e
n
e
c
b
o
r
e
a
n
a
d
n
a

d
n
a
t
s
o
c
y
g
r
e
n
e

,

y
t
i

e
h
t
o
t
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

l

‑
c
o
e
v
g
n
m
m
w
S

i

i

n

i

%
9
7

.

,

1
Z
n

i

%
1
4
8

3
Z
n

i

%
8
d
n
a
2
Z

n

i

%
5
2

.

,

1
Z
n

i

%
7
8

3
Z
n

i

%
0
1
d
n
a
2
Z

m
0
0
0
9
5
1

,

)
5
/
5
(
0
1

m
e
h
t

f

o

l
l

a
d
n
a
k
e
e
w

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
n
t
a
d
e
t
e
p
m
o
c

l

e
v
e

l

m
0
5
0
7
3
3

,

s
k
e
e
w
0
1

i

‑
n
a
r
t

f

o
s
r
a
e
y
9
4

.

5
6

.

2
3

.

±

)
4
/
3
(
7

.

5
7
1

d
n
a
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
g
n

i

e
h
t

t
a
g
n
i
t
e
p
m
o
c

l
l

a

l

e
v
e

l

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
n

±

r
e
p
s
y
a
d
6
o
t
5
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

,

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

±

5
6

.

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

6
0

.

±

2
0
6
1

.

)
5
/
7
(
3
1

9
1

.

±

.

9
7
1

)
4
/
3
(
7

9
1

.

±

.

9
7
1

2
3

.

±

.

5
7
1

)
5
/
5
(
0
1

P
R

P
T

P
R

P
T

P
R

i

g
n
m
m
w
S

i

i

g
n
m
m
w
S

i

.
l

a
t
e
z
e
r
á
u
S
‑
e
t
n
e
m
e
C

l

]
7
2
[

.
l

a
t
e
z
e
r
á
u
S
‑
e
t
n
e
m
e
C

l

]
1
4
[

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
E

)
F
/
M

(
n

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
d
o
i
r
e
p
f
o
e
p
y
T

y
t
i
l
a
d
o
M

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

3
e
l
b
a
T

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
González‑Ravé et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:56 

Page 9 of 14

s
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

i

r
e
h
g
h
d
e
v
e
h
c
a

i

P
R
n
a
h
t
h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s
n

i

n
e
g
y
x
o
m
u
m
i
x
a
M

t
a
y
t
i
c
o
e
v

l

:

x
a
m
2
O
V
v

–

g
k
0
0
6
8
2

,

g
k
0
2
8
8
2

,

±

±

0
5
1
2
8

0
2
1
0
8

,

‑
v
e

l

h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s

i

m
u
m
x
a
m
n

i

‑
l
l

u
p
t
a

l

,

s
s
e
r
p
h
c
n
e
b

(

l

d
e
z
y
a
n
a
s
e
s
i
c
r
e
x
e

l
l

a
n

i

s
l
e

g
e

l

d
n
a

l
r
u
c
m
r
a

,

n
w
o
d

P
T
n

i

r
e
h
g
h
–

i

l

a
c
o

l

d
n
a
)

n
o
i
s
n
e
t
x
e

e
c
n
a
r
u
d
n
e
r
a
u
c
s
u
m

l

%
8
6

,

M
R
6
<
n

i

%
4
5

.

‑
i
t
e
p
e
r

l

a
t
o
t
4
8
4
9

,

s
s
a
m
e
e
r
f
‑
t
a
f

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

P
T

n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p
m
o
c
y
d
o
B

%
7
6

,

M
R
6
<
n

i

%
4
5

.

‑
i
t
e
p
e
r

l

a
t
o
t
7
7
4
9

,

s
k
e
e
w
2
1

s
h
t
n
o
m
6
n
a
h
t
e
r
o
M

i

i

l

s
n
a
g
d
e
d
e
y
s
l
e
d
o
m
h
t
o
B

h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s

l

i

a
m
x
a
m

,
)
s
s
a
m

.

s
s
a
m

t
a
f

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d
d
n
a

e
e
r
f
‑
t
a
f

d
n
a
s
s
a
m

t
a
f
(

d
n
a
M
R
1
1
–
7
n

i

s
p
e
r
2
1
>
n

i

%
7
2

s
n
o
i
t

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
s
u
o
v
e
r
p

i

f

o

i

i

g
n
n
a
r
t
h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s
h
t
i

w

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

I

e
m
u
o
V

l

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
D

‑
r
u
d
n
e
n

i

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
ff
d
o
N

i

,

e
c
n
a
r
u
d
n
e
r
a
u
c
s
u
M

l

s
a
w
P
R

.

s
p
u
o
r
g
n
e
e
w
t
e
b

P
T
n
a
h
t
e
v
i
t
c
e
ff
e
e
r
o
m

l

r
a
u
c
s
u
m
g
n
i
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

t
a

P
T
d
n
a
P
U
D

.

e
c
n
a
r
u
d
n
e

g
e

l

d
n
a
h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s

,

e
c
n
a

d
n
a
)

M
R
1
(

h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s

l

a
t
o
t

i

s
n
a
g
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
m
u
c
r
i
c

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
m
u
c
r
i
c
g
e

l

–

g
k
0
0
5
3
2

,

±

0
0
5
5
8

,

s
k
e
e
w
5
1

e
g
e

l
l

o
c
m
o
r
f

s
t
c
e
b
u
S

j

a
d
n
a
r
a
e
y
e
n
o
n
a
h
t

s
r
a
e
y
5
f

o
m
u
m
x
a
m

i

e
r
o
m
h
t
i

w
s
e
s
r
u
o
c

i

i

g
n
n
a
r
t
‑
t
h
g
e
w

i

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

d
n
a
M
R
1
1
–
7
n

i

s
p
e
r
2
1
>
n

i

%
7
2

s
n
o
i
t

)
s
r
a
e
y
(
e
g
A

5
1
1

.

±

.

6
7
2

)
0
1
/
0
(
0
1

2
9
0

.

±

.

2
6
2

)
0
1
/
0
(
0
1

)
0
1
/
0
1
(
0
2

2
2

.

±

1
2

)
0
1
/
0
1
(
0
2

6
1

.

±

2
2

)
0
1
/
0
1
(
0
2

9
1

.

±

1
2

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

P
T

h
t
g
n
e
r
t
S

]
6
3
[

.
l

a
t
e
s
e
t
s
e
r
P

P
R

P
U
D

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

P
R

P
T

h
t
g
n
e
r
t
S

]
2
4
[

.
l

a
t
e
a
e
h
R

,

d
e
z
i
d
o
i
r
e
p
g
n
i
t
a
u
d
n
u
y
l
i

l

a
d
P
U
D

,

i

i

g
n
n
a
r
t
e
e
r
f
T
F

,

p
u
o
r
g

l

o
r
t
n
o
c
G
C

,

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
d
o
i
r
e
p
k
c
o
b
P
B

l

,

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
d
o
i
r
e
p

l

a
n
o
i
t
i
d
a
r
t
P
T

,

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
d
o
i
r
e
p
e
s
r
e
v
e
r
P
R

;

D
S

±

n
a
e
m
e
r
a
a
t
a
D

n
o
i
t
p
m
u
s
n
o
c

3
e
n
o
Z
3
Z

,

2
e
n
o
Z
2
Z

,

1
e
n
o
Z
1
Z

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
g
n
n
i
a
r
T

i

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
E

)
F
/
M

(
n

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
d
o
i
r
e
p
f
o
e
p
y
T

y
t
i
l
a
d
o
M

y
d
u
t
S

)

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

3
e
l
b
a
T

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
González‑Ravé et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:56 

Page 10 of 14

TID  (characterized  by  covering  ∼80%  of  the  volume 
at  Z1,  with  most  of  the  remaining  20%  conducted  at 
Z3)  in  the  studies  of  Clemente-Suárez  et  al.  [27,  41] 
and  Clemente-Suárez  and  Ramos-Campo  [29].  The 
reverse  periodization  was  featured  as  a  polarized  TID 
in the studies of Clemente-Suárez et al. [27, 31, 41], and 
pyramidal  TID  in  the  studies  of  Arroyo-Toledo  et  al. 
[26, 34]. Gómez Martin et al. [35] used a polarized TID 
in  the  first  mesocycle,  and  a  pyramidal  distribution  in 
the  second  and  third  mesocycle  for  the  reverse  perio-
dization  group,  while  the  block  periodization  applied 
a  polarized  distribution  in  the  second  mesocycle  and 
a  pyramidal  distribution  in  the  first  and  third  mesocy-
cles.  Block  periodization  using  a  pyramidal  TID  was 
employed  in  the  studies  of  Arroyo-Toledo  et  al.  [26] 
and Gómez Martin et al. [35]. In relation to the strength 
training studies, the recreationally trained women of the 
study  of  Prestes  et  al.  [36]  performed  67%  of  training 
between  7  and  11  repetition  maximum  (RM),  followed 
by 27% of training > 12RM, and 5% < 6RM. This classifi-
cation  was  used  in  the  review  following  the  guidelines 
established by Haff et al. [44]. However, Rhea et al. [42] 
did not report the training intensity used for the perio-
dization groups.

Regarding  training  volume,  the  running  studies 
reported  the  volume  using  different  metrics  of  either 
time  or  distance.  The  athletes  in  the  study  of  Gómez 
Martin et al. [35] performed about 3300 min of training 
over 12 weeks, without substantial differences between 
periodization model groups. In the case of the study of 
Bradbury et al. [28], the runners completed 290–300 km 
in 12 weeks without substantial differences in the mean 
weekly volume between the periodization groups. How-
ever,  this  volume  differed  between  the  training  blocks 
according  to  the  periodization  model.  All  swimming 
studies  displayed  the  training  volume  in  meters.  In  the 
studies of Clemente-Suárez et al. [27, 31, 41] conducted 
with  the  same  sample  of  athletes,  those  swimmers 
undertaking traditional periodization performed double 
the training volume of the reverse periodization swim-
mers  (340  km  vs.  160  km).  In  addition,  the  traditional 
periodization  group  performed  324  km  compared  to 
212 km for the reverse periodization group in the study 
of Arroyo-Toledo et al. [34]. However, the same training 
volume was performed by the block and reverse perio-
dization  groups  (90  km)  in  the  study  of  Arroyo-Toledo 
et al. [26]. Finally, regarding the strength training stud-
ies, the athletes of Prestes et al.  [36] performed a total 
of  9,500  repetitions  without  a  substantial  difference 
between  periodization  model  groups.  Similarly,  the 
athletes  in  the  study  of  Rhea  et  al.  [42]  lifted  between 
80,000 and 85,000 kg without differences between peri-
odization model groups.

Effects on Physiology Parameters

There  are  three  main  physiological  parameters  [45] 
affecting  endurance  performance:  (i)  maximal  oxygen 
uptake  (V̇O2max),  (ii)  lactate  threshold  and  (iii)  move-
ment  economy.  Both  reverse  periodization  and  block 
periodization training have yielded similar improvements 
in  V̇O2max  and  the  velocity  corresponding  to  V̇O2max 
(vV̇O2max)  [35].  Greater  improvements  in  V̇O2max  for 
reverse  periodization  and  reductions  for  the  traditional 
periodization  model  were  reported  in  the  study  of  Cle-
mente-Suárez  et  al.  [27].  Similar  improvements  in  run-
ning  economy  and  peak  oxygen  uptake  (V̇O2peak)  were 
reported  for  traditional  and  reverse  periodization  [28]. 
Energy  cost  of  swimming  was  impaired  following  tra-
ditional  periodization,  without  any  substantial  changes 
after  reverse  periodization  [41].  Finally,  aerobic  and 
anaerobic thresholds remained largely unchanged follow-
ing both traditional and reverse periodization [41].

Effects of Exercise Performance

Two  studies  [27,  31]  reported  50-m  swimming  perfor-
mance  with  reverse  periodization  compared  to  tradi-
tional  periodization.  The  pre-post  training  intervention 
times  in  the  50-m  test  were  similar  with  both  forms 
of  training  (traditional  periodization:  28.81 ± 1.72  vs. 
28.78 ± 1.44  s;  reverse  periodization:  29.50 ± 2.07  vs. 
30.24 ± 2.83  s).  The  studies  of  Arroyo-Toledo  et  al.  [26, 
34]  reported  an  improvement  of  100-m  swimming  per-
formance  in  both  forms  of  periodization  (5%  in  100-m 
time in reverse periodization and 1.2% in block periodi-
zation). In relation to running performance, 2000 m [29] 
and 5000 m [28] time trials improved 2.4% after 12 weeks 
of  both  reverse  periodization  and  traditional  periodiza-
tion training. In the case of the study of Clemente-Suárez 
et al. [43], the authors did not find improvements in the 
performance of 1000 m running test regarding the use of 
traditional or reverse periodization. Similarly, both forms 
of periodization showed gains in maximum strength lev-
els  (1RM)  with  different  exercises  analyzed  in  the  study 
of Prestes et al. [36]. However, the increases were greater 
with  traditional  periodization  when  compared  with 
reverse  periodization.  Regarding  muscular  endurance 
gains, both forms of periodization increased similarly (16 
and 15% for reverse periodization and traditional perio-
dization respectively)[42].

Discussion
This  systematic  review 
identified  11  studies  that 
directly compared traditional periodization (n = 9) and 
block periodization (n = 2) training with reverse perio-
dization.  Studies  were  conducted  in  both  recreational 
[28,  29,  31,  35,  42,  43] and trained athletes [26,  27,  34, 
36, 41]. The training programs evaluated in this review 

González‑Ravé et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:56 

Page 11 of 14

Fig. 2  Example of mesocycle distribution of traditional periodization, block periodization and reverse linear periodization. A Intensity distribution of 
the different periodization models. B Volume distribution of the different periodization models

 González‑Ravé et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:56 

Page 12 of 14

were  predominantly  short-term  interventions  [26,  27, 
29,  31,  41,  43]  lasting ~ 10  weeks,  and  only  four  stud-
ies  had  a  duration  longer  than  12  weeks  [28,  34–36] 
ranging  from  12  to  15  weeks.  The  short  duration  of 
the interventions in periodization studies makes it dif-
ficult  to  draw  firm  conclusions  regarding  longer-term 
changes  in  exercise  and/or  sports  performance  of  any 
particular periodization model.

In  relation  to  competitive  (sports)  performance,  5  of 
the  11  studies  included  in  this  review  were  in  swim-
ming.  A  systematic  review  on  swimming  periodiza-
tion  identified  that  the  traditional  periodization  was 
the  most  common  form  used  in  well-trained  swim-
mers,  but  only  four  studies  compared  traditional  ver-
sus  reverse  periodization  [5].  Our  results  suggest 
that  reverse  periodization  improved  swimming  per-
formance  [26]  more  than  block  periodization,  while 
Clemente-Suárez  and  Ramos-Campo  [29],  reported  a 
similar improvement in swimming technical ability and 
swimming performance with reverse periodization and 
traditional  periodization.  However,  neither  traditional 
(characterized  by  pyramidal  TID)  nor  reverse  perio-
dization  (characterized  by  polarized  TID)  yielded  sig-
nificant improvements in 50-m swimming performance 
[27,  31].  Only  two  studies  [26,  34]  reported  significant 
improvements  in  100-m  swimming  performance  fol-
lowing  reverse  periodization  and  block  periodization. 
The  greater  improvements  for  the  reverse  periodiza-
tion  group  (5%)  could  be  explained  by  the  low  perfor-
mance  level  of  swimmers  used  in  these  studies  (~ 65  s 
in 100-m), or a greater specificity of stimulus in the first 
weeks of training (high-intensity training). In addition, 
it  appears  that  traditional  periodization  can  improve 
the  swimming  efficiency  by ~ 2%  most  likely  related  to 
the  higher  volume  of  technical  work  performed  dur-
ing  the  training  program,  while  reverse  periodization 
can  increase  the   VO2max  by  6.4%  in  trained  swimmers 
[27]. Reverse periodization has been used in combina-
tion  with  a  polarized  TID  for  improving  performance 
in  sprint  events.  On  the  other  hand,  both  reverse 
periodization  and  traditional  periodization  improved 
2000 m and 5000 m running time trials [28,  43], with-
out  a  substantial  difference  between  periodization 
models, and anaerobic running performance improved 
in  reverse  periodization  compared  to  block  periodiza-
tion;  although  the  sample  was  recreational  runners, 
the  study  supports  the  proposition  that  both  periodi-
zation  models  are  better  than  non-planned  training 
[35]. However, the study of Clemente-Suárez et al. [43] 
did  not  show  improvements  in  1000  m  performance 
regarding  the  use  of  traditional  or  reverse  periodiza-
tion.  These  results  indicate  that  reverse  periodization 
could be a viable alternative for improving performance 

in short distance events (primarily anaerobic in nature) 
such as the 100-m swim event, while traditional perio-
dization  seems  to  be  the  best  choice  for  long  distance 
(swimming)  events,  without  a  clear  effect  on  short 
sprint  events  such  as  the  50-m  swim  or  middle  and 
long-distance  running  events.  The  lack  of  effects  on 
swim  performance  could  relate  to  training  a  variety  of 
fitness  adaptations  rather  than  emphasizing  the  pri-
mary fitness characteristic [11].

To  our  knowledge,  only  two  studies  have  reported 
greater  gains  in  1RM  strength  in  traditional  periodiza-
tion/programming  as  opposed  to  reverse  periodization/
programming  [36,  42].  Regarding  the  effects  of  periodi-
zation on muscular strength, Prestes et al. [36], reported 
increases  in  muscular  strength  for  both  forms  of  perio-
dization  (traditional  periodization  vs.  reverse  periodiza-
tion)  in  bench  press  (17%  and  16%),  lat  pull-down  (30% 
and 22%), arm curl (20% and 16%) and leg extension (37% 
and 32%). However, Prestes et al. [36], asserted that tra-
ditional  periodization  rather  than  reverse  periodization 
is more effective for strength and hypertrophy. There is a 
possibility for traditional periodization to be more effec-
tive  as  it  allows  for  more  quality  training  with  heavier 
weights  at  the  end  of  the  program  [36].  A  similar  com-
parison  also  showed  a  greater  increase  in  strength  after 
traditional periodization in the study of Rhea et al. [42]. 
However,  both  reverse  periodization  (16%)  and  tradi-
tional  periodization  (15%)  showed  a  similar  increase  in 
muscular endurance [42]. Analysis of the effect size (ES) 
indicates  that  traditional  periodization  was  more  effec-
tive  at  eliciting  strength  than  reverse  periodization  [42] 
(ES = −  0.31).  Both  studies  matched  the  intensity  and 
volume of training, with the only difference being the dis-
tribution of training over the weeks. The similar increase 
in  muscular  strength  for  both  periodization  approaches 
likely  relates  to  the  training  stimulus  involving  matched 
loads,  and  a  similar  pattern  of  the  functional  responses 
to training stress. With respect to improvements in mus-
cular endurance, reverse periodization was characterized 
by decreased intensity and increased volume toward the 
last few weeks of training in these studies, which is more 
like a strength-endurance training stimulus. It seems rea-
sonable  to  improve  the  muscular  endurance  with  train-
ing  more  specific  to  this  strength  attribute  before  the 
post-test evaluation. Prior training history will influence 
adaptations to further training interventions, particularly 
in strength training [46]. Although subjects are typically 
categorized  as  recreational  or  trained,  only  the  study  of 
Prestes et al.  [36] formally detailed that the subjects per-
formed  at  least  three  times  per  week  (3 × 10RM)  in  the 
previous  6  months,  without  details  of  the  periodization 
model  used.  Similarly,  the  study  of  Rhea  et  al.  [42]  only 
reported  that  subjects  participated  in  strength  training 

González‑Ravé et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:56 

Page 13 of 14

programs for at least 12 months, but without specifying 
the underlying training and periodization model.

In  addition  to  effects  on  performance  and  physi-
ological  parameters,  different  types  of  periodization 
may have variable effects on body composition. Arroyo 
Toledo et al. [26] reported that block periodization can 
elicit  more  favorable  improvements  in  body  composi-
tion  than  reverse  periodization  in  moderately  trained 
female  swimmers.  The  primary  premise  of  block  peri-
odization  is  employing  highly  concentrated  training 
workload  phases  (periodization  blocks)  to  stimulate 
adaptation and residual effects [26]. The blocks must be 
sequenced in a logical order to benefit from the resid-
ual effects [26]. Reductions in fat mass can be achieved 
during  a  period  of  high-intensity  training  [46],  and 
including  a  specific  phase  of  training  for  this  purpose 
maybe  useful  in  sports  where  body  composition  is 
important for performance.

There were some limitations to this review given the 
heterogeneity  of  sports,  training  and  methodologi-
cal  approaches  of  the  underlying  studies.  There  was 
substantial  inter-individual  variability  regarding  the 
participants  in  the  different  studies  (which  included 
teenage  swimmers,  local/regional  swimmers,  experi-
enced  runners,  etc.)  across  all  performance  variables 
that may have impaired the ability to establish conclu-
sive outcomes in this systematic review. In addition, as 
periodization generally refers to periods of a season or 
more, it may be logical for future research to evaluate 
longer  periods,  so  that  differences  after  each  periodi-
zation  model  can  become  more  pronounced.  A  criti-
cal  drawback  in  some  of  these  studies  is  the  lack  of  a 
randomized  controlled  design  (the  majority  of  studies 
did  not  equalize  volume  nor  intensity  when  compar-
ing  two  different  workloads  across  time)  as  shown  in 
Table  3.  For  example,  the  total  volume  of  traditional 
periodization during 10 weeks of training in one study 
was more than 337,000 m, while for the reverse perio-
dization the volume was only ~ 160,000 m [27, 31]. The 
absence of a control group did not reflect the improve-
ments  in  periodized  models  vs.  control  group.  More 
research  over  a  longer  term  is  needed  to  develop  a 
stronger evidence base comparing and contrasting the 
different  types  of  periodization  models.  Most  of  the 
existing studies have not reported details of nutritional 
status,  fatigue  levels  and/or  variations  in  motivation 
and  other  psychological  attributes,  that  can  all  influ-
ence  adaptation  and  performance.  Future  work  will 
identify  individual  athlete  characteristics  associated 
with  the  different  models  of  periodization,  and  which 
events  and  sports  might  benefit  substantially  from 
reverse periodization training.

Conclusion
It  is  not  clear  if  reverse  periodization  is  more  effective 
in  improving  sports  performance  than  other  periodized 
models. Use of reverse periodization likely induces simi-
lar improvements to a traditional model in shorter events 
such  as  the  100-m  swimming  event.  Comparative  stud-
ies  of  periodization  models  in  endurance  sports  require 
careful  planning  of  experimental  design,  longer  study 
periods, and where appropriate careful matching of train-
ing volumes and intensities.

Abbreviations
[La‑]b: Blood lactate; TRIMP: Training impulse; TID: Training intensity distribu‑
tion; RP: Reverse periodization; RM: Repetition maximum; V̇O2max: Maximal 
oxygen uptake; V̇O2peak: Peak oxygen uptake; ES: Effect size.

Acknowledgements
Not applicable.

Author contributions
JMG‑R, FG‑M and VR‑C conceptualized the review and criteria, and JMG‑R, 
FG‑M and VR‑C completed the screening and data extraction of data within 
this manuscript. All authors created the tables and figures. All authors contrib‑
uted to the writing of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final 
manuscript.

Funding
This project received no additional funding from an external source.

Availability of data and materials
All data and material reported in this systematic review are from peer‑
reviewed publications.

Code availability
Not applicable.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
José Maria González‑Ravé, Fernando González‑Mohíno, Víctor Rodrigo‑Car‑
ranza and David Pyne have no conflicts of interest.

Author details
1 Sports Training Laboratory, Faculty of Sports Sciences, University of Castilla‑La 
Mancha, Carlos III Avenue, 45008 Toledo, Spain. 2 Facultad de Ciencias de la 
Vida y de la Naturaleza, Universidad Nebrija, Madrid, Spain. 3 Faculty of Health, 
Research Institute for Sport and Exercise, University of Canberra, Canberra, ACT 
, Australia. 

Received: 24 December 2021   Accepted: 31 March 2022

References
 1.  Kataoka R, Vasenina E, Loenneke J, Buckner SL. Periodization: varia‑

tion in the definition and discrepancies in study design. Sports Med. 
2021;51:625–51.

 González‑Ravé et al. Sports Medicine - Open            (2022) 8:56 

Page 14 of 14

 2.  Cunanan AJ, DeWeese BH, Wagle JP, Carroll KM, Sausaman R, Hornsby 
WG, et al. The general adaptation syndrome: a foundation for the con‑
cept of periodization. Sports Med. 2018;48:787–97.

 3.  Krüger A. From Russia with Love? Sixty years of proliferation of LP Mat‑

 30.  Pla R, Le Meur Y, Aubry A, Toussaint J‑F, Hellard P. Effects of a 6‑week 

period of polarized or threshold training on performance and fatigue 
in elite swimmers. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. Human Kinetics; 
2019;14:183–9.

veyev’s concept of Periodisation? Staps. 2016;114:51–9.

 31.  Clemente‑Suárez VJ, Fernandes RJ, Arroyo‑Toledo JJ, Figueiredo P, 

 4.  Hellard P, Avalos‑Fernandes M, Lefort G, Pla R, Mujika I, Toussaint JF, et al. 
Elite swimmers’ training patterns in the 25 weeks prior to their season’s 
best performances: insights into periodization from a 20‑years cohort. 
Front Physiol. 2019;10:1–16.

 5.  González‑Ravé JM, Hermosilla F, González‑Mohíno F, Casado A, Pyne DB. 

Training intensity distribution, training volume, and periodization models 
in elite swimmers: a systematic review. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 
2021;16:913–26.

 6.  Hermosilla F, González‑Rave JM, Castillo JA, Pyne DB. Periodization and 
programming for individual 400 m medley swimmers. Int J Environ Res 
Public Health. 2021;18:6474.

 7.  Hornsby WG, Fry AC, Haff GG, Stone MH. Addressing the confusion within 

periodization research. J Funct Morphol Kinesiol. 2020;5:1–7.

 8.  Matveyev L. Periodization of sports trainining. Moskow: Fizkultura i Sport; 

1965.

 9.  Pihkala L. Allgemeine Richtlinien für das athletische Training. Krümmel: 

 10. 

Weidmann; 1937.
Issurin VB. New horizons for the methodology and physiology of training 
periodization. Sports Med. 2010;40:189–206.

 11.  Stone MH, Hornsby WG, Haff GG, Fry AC, Suarez DG, Liu J, et al. Periodiza‑
tion and block periodization in sports: emphasis on strength‑power 
training‑a provocative and challenging narrative. J Strength Cond Res. 
2021;35:2351–71.

 12.  Kiely J, Tradition‑driven E, Kiely J. Periodization paradigms in the 21st 

century. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2015;7:242–50.

González‑Ravé JM, Vilas‑Boas JP. Autonomic adaptation after traditional 
and reverse swimming training periodizations. Acta Physiol Hung. 
2015;102:105–13.

 32.  Seiler S. What is best practice for training intensity and duration distribu‑
tion in endurance athletes? Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2010;5:276–91.

 33.  Kenneally M, Casado A, Santos‑Concejero J. The effect of periodiza‑

tion and training intensity distribution on middle‑and long‑distance 
running performance: a systematic review. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 
2018;13:1114–21.

 34.  Arroyo‑Toledo JJ, Clemente VJ, González‑Rave JM, Campo‑Ramos D, 

Sortwell A. Comparison between traditional and reverse periodization: 
swimming performance and specific strength values. Int J Swim Kinet. 
2013;2:87–97.

 35.  Martín JPG, Clemente‑Suárez VJ, Ramos‑Campo DJ. Hematological and 
running performance modification of trained athletes after reverse vs. 
block training periodization. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020;17:1–11.

 36.  Prestes J, De Lima C, Frollini AB, Donatto FF, Conte M. Comparison of 

linear and reverse linear periodization effects on maximal strength and 
body composition. J Strength Cond Res. 2009;23:266–74.

 37.  Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG. Preferred reporting items for 

systematic reviews and meta‑analyses: the PRISMA statement (Reprinted 
from Annals of Internal Medicine). Phys Ther. 2009;89:873–80.

 38.  de Morton NA. The PEDro scale is a valid measure of the methodologi‑
cal quality of clinical trials: a demographic study. Aust J Physiother. 
2009;55:129–33.

 13.  Pihkala L. Allgemeine Richtlinien für das athletische Training. München: 

 39.  Philips B, Ball C, Sackett D, Badenoch D, Straus S, Haynes B, et al. Oxford 

 14. 

Athletik; 1930.
Issurin V. Periodization training from ancient precursors to structured 
block models. Kinesiology. 2014;46:3–9.

 15.  Stone MH, O’Bryant H. A hypothetical model for strength training. J 

Sports Med Phys Fitness. 1981;21:342–51.

 16.  Stone MH, Obyrant. Weight training: a scientific approach. Burgess; 1984.
 17.  Fleck SJ. Periodized strength training: a critical review. J Strength Cond 

Res. 1999;13:82–9.

 18.  Verjoshanski JV. Principi dell’organizzazione dell’allenamento nelle disci‑

pline di forza veloce, nell’atletiva leggera. Atlet. 1979.

 19.  Verjoshanski I V. Entrenamiento deportivo: planificación y programación. 

Martinez Roca; 1990.

 20.  Verjoshanski JV. Das Ende der ‘Periodisierung’des sportlichen Trainings im 

Spitzensport. Leistungssport. 1998;28:14–9.

 21.  Rhea MR, Alderman BL. A meta‑analysis of periodized versus nonpe‑

riodized strength and power training programs. Res Q Exerc Sport. 
2004;75:413–22.

 22.  Hartmann H, Wirth K, Keiner M, Mickel C, Sander A, Szilvas E. Short‑term 
periodization models: effects on strength and speed‑strength perfor‑
mance. Sport Med. 2015;45:1373–86.

Centre for evidence‑based medicine levels of evidence. Oxford Centre for 
Evidence‑based Medicine; 2001.

 40.  Maher CG, Sherrington C, Herbert RD, Moseley AM, Elkins M. Reliability of 
the PEDro Scale for Rating Quality of Randomized Controlled Trials. Phys 
Ther. 2003;83:713–21.

 41.  Clemente‑Suárez VJ, Dalamitros A, Ribeiro J, Sousa A, Fernandes RJ, Vilas‑
Boas JP. The effects of two different swimming training periodization on 
physiological parameters at various exercise intensities. Eur J Sport Sci. 
2017;17:425–32.

 42.  Rhea MR, Phillips WT, Burkett LN, Stone WJ, Ball SD, Alvar BA, et al. A Com‑
parison of linear and daily undulating periodized programs with equated 
volume and intensity for local muscular endurance. J Strength Cond Res. 
2003;17:82–7.

 43.  Clemente‑Suárez VJ, Ramos‑Campo DJ, Tornero‑Aguilera JF, Parraca JA, 

Batalha N. The effect of periodization on training program adherence. Int 
J Environ Res Public Health. 2021;18:12973.

 44.  Haff GG, Triplett NT. Essentials of strength training and conditioning 4th 

edition. Human Kinetics, Champaign, Illinois; 2015.

 45.  Di Prampero PE, Atchou G, Brückner JC, Moia C. The energetics of endur‑

ance running. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol. 1986;55:259–66.

 23.  Matveev LP, Zdornyj AP. Fundamentals of sports training. Progress; 1981.
 24. 

Issurin V. Blok Periodization vs training theory: a review. J Sports Med Phys 
Fitness. 2008;48:65–75.

 25.  Bompa TO, Buzzichelli C. Periodization: theory and methodology of train‑

 46.  Lee MG, Park KS, Kim DU, Choi SM, Kim HJ. Effects of high‑intensity exer‑
cise training on body composition, abdominal fat loss, and cardiorespira‑
tory fitness in middle‑aged Korean females. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 
2012;37:1019–27.

Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in pub‑
lished maps and institutional affiliations.

ing. Human kinetics; 2019.

 26.  Arroyo‑Toledo JJ, Clemente VJ, González‑Rave JM. The effects of ten 
weeks block and reverse periodization training on swimming perfor‑
mance and body composition of moderately trained female swimmers. J 
Swim Res. 2013;21:1.

 27.  Clemente‑Suárez VJ, Fernandes RJ, De Jesus K, Pelarigo JG, Arroyo‑Toledo 
JJ, Paulo V‑B. Do traditional and reverse swimming training periodizations 
lead to similar aerobic performance improvements? J Sports Med Phys 
Fitness. 2018;58:761–7.

 28.  Bradbury DG, Landers GJ, Benjanuvatra N, Goods PS. Comparison of 
linear and reverse linear periodized programs with equated volume 
and intensity for endurance running performance. J Strength Cond Res. 
2020;34:1345–53.

 29.  Clemente‑Suárez VJ, Ramos‑Campo DJ. Effectiveness of reverse vs tra‑

ditional linear training periodization in triathlon. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health. 2019;16:1–13.
