---
pmid: 35682467
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/35682467
title: Use of the Dietary Inflammatory Index to Assess the Diet of Young Physically Active Men.
---

Article
Use of the Dietary Inﬂammatory Index to Assess the Diet of
Young Physically Active Men

Anna K˛eska 1,*, Anna Pietrzak 1

and Dagmara Iwa ´nska 2

1 Department of Human Biology, Józef Piłsudski University of Physical Education, 00-809 Warsaw, Poland;

anna.pietrzak@awf.edu.pl

2 Department of Biomedical Sciences, Józef Piłsudski University of Physical Education, 00-809 Warsaw, Poland;

dagmara.iwanska@awf.edu.pl

* Correspondence: anna.keska@awf.edu.pl

Abstract: Background: Chronic inﬂammation can lead to the development of obesity, diabetes and
other chronic diseases. One of the factors causing inﬂammation is diet. The aim of this study was
to assess the inﬂammatory potential of the diet, expressed by the DII index, in young physically
active men. Methods: A total of 94 physically active students aged 19–23 participated in the study.
The subjects’ diets were assessed on the basis of 4-day dietary records, which were then analyzed
using the computer program “Diet 5.0”. The DII was calculated for each participant based on the
individual consumption of the selected dietary components. The concentration of CRP protein was
also determined. Results: Participants was divided into groups according to values of DII. Diets with
different DIIs provided similar amounts of calories, but differed signiﬁcantly in the content of many
nutrients. Participants whose diets showed the most anti-inﬂammatory effects consumed signiﬁcantly
more protein, magnesium, iron, zinc, antioxidant vitamins, and B vitamins compared to others. The
highest concentration of CRP protein was observed in men whose diet was described as the most
pro-inﬂammatory (Q4 group). A signiﬁcant relationship was found between DII and body fat (%) in
men in the most anti-inﬂammatory (Q1 group) and neutral diet (Q2–Q3 group). Conclusions: The
Dietary Inﬂammatory Index is a promising method of describing the effect of dietary intake on the
risk of inﬂammation in young, healthy individuals engaging in regular physical activity.

Keywords: inﬂammation; nutrition; DII; physical activity; young men

1. Introduction

Inﬂammation is a defensive reaction of the immune system to a pathological factor
that damages cell structures. It is the natural response of any healthy organism to neutralize
pathogens and maintain homeostasis. The normal inﬂammatory response occurs when the
threat is present and resolves when the threat is over [1,2]. However, the action of certain
biological, psychological, social, and environmental factors can prevent acute inﬂammation
from subsiding and contribute to the persistent presence of chronic inﬂammation in the
body. Chronic inﬂammation is characterized by the activation of the immune system
components that often differ from those involved in an acute immune response [3]. Shifting
the inﬂammatory response from short-term to long-term leads to severe changes in the
functioning of all tissues and organs, which can increase the risk of various diseases
in both young and old people. Long-term inﬂammation in the body is now linked to
the development of chronic non-communicable diseases such as obesity, diabetes, and
cancer [4,5].

Factors contributing to the development of long-term inﬂammation include chronic
infections, lifestyle-related obesity, intestinal dysbiosis, sleep disturbances, psychological
stress, social isolation and environmental and industrial pollution [2]. According to existing
data low physical activity and poor diet also contribute to the occurrence of chronic

Citation: K˛eska, A.; Pietrzak, A.;

Iwa ´nska, D. Use of the Dietary

Inﬂammatory Index to Assess the

Diet of Young Physically Active Men.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022,

19, 6884. https://doi.org/10.3390/

ijerph19116884

Academic Editor: Paul B.

Tchounwou

Received: 30 April 2022

Accepted: 2 June 2022

Published: 4 June 2022

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

with regard to jurisdictional claims in

published maps and institutional afﬁl-

iations.

Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 6884. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19116884

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph

International Journal ofEnvironmental Researchand Public HealthInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 6884

2 of 11

inﬂammation [6]. The link between physical inactivity and an increased risk of diseases
associated with long-term inﬂammation has been well documented [7,8]. It is assumed
that lack of physical activity promotes inﬂammation as it causes the body to store more
fat, especially visceral fat [9]. It is also believed that in physically inactive people, the
intensiﬁcation of inﬂammation is a result of the reduced secretion of anti-inﬂammatory
substances by the skeletal muscles. These substances are cytokines (e.g., IL-6, Il-8) and other
small proteins (e.g., brain-derived neurotrophic factor BDNF, irisin) called myokines [10]. It
should be emphasized that myokines are produced by skeletal muscles and have systemic
anti-inﬂammatory effects primarily during muscles’ contraction [11]. Decreased production
of myokines in physically inactive people is associated with increased pathophysiological
changes typical of chronic inﬂammation, including insulin resistance, dyslipidemia and
high blood pressure [12]. On the other hand, exercise-induced damage to muscle ﬁbers
is known to cause transient inﬂammation which, if overtrained, can turn into chronic
inﬂammation [13]. Thus, the relationship between exercise and inﬂammation is more
complex and depends on many factors.

The same goes for diet. For example, following a Mediterranean Diet based mainly
on fruits, vegetables, ﬁsh and other products containing many unsaturated fatty acids is
associated with the reduction of inﬂammation [14]. In turn, the Western Diet, very popular
in developed countries, characterized by a high consumption of saturated fatty acids and
simple carbohydrates, contributes to a signiﬁcant increase in the level of inﬂammatory
markers in the blood (e.g., C-reactive protein, CRP). It has been shown that these nutri-
ents negatively affect the intestinal microﬂora, and by increasing the permeability of the
intestinal barrier, they cause inﬂammation [15].

A growing number of studies conﬁrming diet inﬂuence on the occurrence of inﬂam-
mation have contributed to the creation of an indicator called the Dietary Inﬂammatory
Index (DII) [16,17]. DII was established in 2013 on the basis of numerous publications
from 1950 to 2007, which described the inﬂuence of 45 food components, then included
in the DII, on inﬂammation development [18]. Each component of DII was given an in-
dividual positive or negative point value. Positive values were assigned to ingredients
and/or products that exhibit pro-inﬂammatory properties (e.g., saturated fatty acids), while
negative values were assigned to ingredients and/or products with anti-inﬂammatory
properties (e.g., vitamins, minerals) [19]. This relatively new dietary index was validated
against inﬂammatory cytokines [20,21]. The studies conducted so far have also conﬁrmed
its relationship with the occurrence of components of the metabolic syndrome, such as high
waist circumference, high TG concentration or hypertension [22]. Thus, the development
of the Diet Inﬂammatory Index allowed for a better assessment of the quality of consumed
food, mainly in the context of its impact on health.

Previous studies which analyzed DII mainly concerned middle-aged and elderly
people, often in the early or advanced stages of the disease (e.g., cancer, diabetes) and
characterized by moderate physical activity. For example, a large 2017 United States
study looked at ethnically diverse people aged 45–75 participating in the cancer registry
program [23]. This study conﬁrmed an association between the pro-inﬂammatory potential
of the diet, described by the DII index, and an increased risk of colorectal cancer. In
another study by Visseres et al., the relationship of DII with the development of arterial
hypertension was investigated in women aged 51–53 years [24]. Therefore, data on the
value of the Diet Inﬂammatory Index of healthy young people are insufﬁcient. Meanwhile,
the few existing studies show that the diet of young people, especially men, often promotes
chronic inﬂammation, thus increasing the risk of diseases related to it [25,26].

Taking into account the above information, as well as the importance of proper nutri-
tion for maintaining high physical performance, it seems advisable to undertake research
on the inﬂammatory potential of the diet, expressed by the DII index, in young, physically
active men.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 6884

3 of 11

2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Subjects

Students of the Józef Piłsudski University of Physical Education in Warsaw, whose
physical activity results only from participation in sports activities provided in the study
program, took part in the study. The duration of physical activity ranged from four to seven
hours/week. Additional inclusion criteria for the study were: being healthy, not taking
medications, not smoking, and consenting to participate in the study. Participants were
recruited on the basis of advertisements in student dormitories and by word-of mouth.
Originally, it was planned to recruit 100 physical education students. This many students
agreed to participate in the research. However, complete data were obtained in 94 young
men aged 19–23 years.

The study protocol has been approved by the Józef Piłsudski University of Physical
Education Ethics Committee. Participants were informed about the purpose and procedures
of the research and provided their written consent.

2.2. Anthropometric and Biochemical Measurements

Assessment of the basic anthropometric parameters, i.e., body weight and height,
was performed using standard methods and equipment. Height was measured to the
nearest 0.5 cm and body weight was measured to the nearest 0.1 kg. Based on both
parameters, body mass index (BMI) was calculated. Waist (cm) was measured using a
standard, retractable, non-metallic tape at the midpoint between the lower rib and the top
of the iliac crest. Waist-to-height ratio (WHtR) was calculated. Body fat content (%) was
assessed by the bioimpedance method (BIA) in the tetrapolar version using the BC-418
device (Tanita Co., Tokyo, Japan). The following values of body fat percentage 14–17%
were accepted as characteristic for lean men [27].

Anthropometric measurements were carried out in duplicate and then averaged. All
measurements were taken by the same researcher, in the morning with the participants
wearing sports outﬁts without shoes. Students were asked to arrive at the laboratory
during 0800–1000 h after an overnight fast, and to refrain from exercise for 24 h prior
to body composition analysis and blood collection. Blood for hs-CRP concentration was
drawn from the antecubital vein by an authorized laboratory technician. hs-CRP concen-
tration was measured by an immunoturbidimetric method with latex reinforcement using
spectrophotometry. The blood was centrifuged (10 min; 3000 rpm), then the plasma was
collected and hs-CRP was determined. The reference values for the study were <0.5 mg/dL,
while the concentration of hs-CRP protein above 10 mg/dl indicates inﬂammation.

2.3. Diet Assessment

Dietary assessment was made on the basis of the nutrition records from 4 days
(2 weekdays, 2 weekend days). Weekday notes were collected in the presence of a trained
employee. Notes from weekend days were made by each participant, previously instructed
on the correct recording method. Study participants were asked not to use any dietary
restrictions while collecting nutritional data. To identify the size of consumed portions, the
“Album of photos of products and dishes” developed at the Institute of Food and Nutrition
was used [28]. The content of selected nutrients and energy was calculated using the “Diet
5.0” computer program, also developed at the Institute of Food and Nutrition in Warsaw.

2.4. Calculation of Dietary Inﬂammatory Index

The DII values were calculated according to the method proposed by Shivappa et al. [18].
To calculate the DII for each participant, the individual consumption of products and diet
components were used. These values were normalized to the mean global consumption
value (Z-score) and converted into the percentile score (PS). The PS parameters were then
recalculated to a symmetric distribution to “0” (centered percentile value (CPV)) with
values from “−1” (maximum anti-inﬂammatory) to “1” (maximum pro-inﬂammatory).
The CVP values obtained for individual products/nutrients were then multiplied by the

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 6884

4 of 11

overall inﬂammatory effect score, which allowed the obtaining of the DII for individual
dietary components. After summing up the DII values of all analyzed diet components, the
total DII for each study participant were calculated [18]. Of the 45 original DII components,
35 were available for this evaluation. Components such as ﬂavan-3-ol, ﬂavones, ﬂavonols,
ﬂavonones, and antho-cyanidins included in the original DII calculation were not analyzed
in the current study because they were not available from the computer program “Diet 5.0”.

2.5. Statistical Analysis

The normality of the distributions has been checked using the Shapiro-Wilk test. The
signiﬁcance of the differences between the groups depending on their distribution was
assessed either using ANOVA for normally distributed data or the Kruskal-Wallis rank
ANOVA for non-normalized data. Results are presented as means ± SD. Differences at
p < 0.05 were considered signiﬁcant. The relationships between the variables were assessed
by analyzing the Spearman’s simple correlation coefﬁcients. The analysis was performed
with the use of Statistica v.10. (StatSoft, Tulsa, OK, USA).

3. Results

The aim of the study was to determine whether young physically active men differ
in body composition and the concentration of inﬂammatory markers, depending on the
consumed diet described by the DII index. In addition, an analysis was performed to
identify nutrients (DII components) that had the greatest impact on the pro-and anti-
inﬂammatory nature of young men’s diet. Therefore, the obtained data was divided into
quartiles (Q1; Q2; Q3; Q4) based on the values of the calculated DII. The following groups
were distinguished: the group with the most anti-inﬂammatory diet (Q1) with DII values
−3.39; −1.05, the group with the most pro-inﬂammatory diet (Q4) with DII values 1.34;
4.23 and the group with the neutral diet (Q2–Q3) with DII values −1.03; 1.30.

The data presented in Table 1 show that the men included in the particular quartile
groups did not differ in body height and body mass, as well as in the content and dis-
tribution of body fat. The body fat content of all study participants indicated that they
were lean.

Table 1. Anthropometric characteristics of participants (mean ± SD).

Q1n = 24 (25%)
Most Anti-Inﬂammatory
Diet

Q2–Q3n = 49 (50%)

Q4n = 22 (25%)
Most
Pro-Inﬂammatory Diet

DII (min; max)

Age [years]
Height [cm]
Body mass [kg]
BMI
Body fat %
WHtR %

(−3.39; −1.05)

21.4 ± 2.12
179.5 ± 5.92
77.3 ± 7.42
24.0 ± 2.30
12.0 ± 3.08
43.9 ± 3.90

(−1.03; 1.30)

21.2 ± 1.72
180.9 ± 5.54
77.8 ± 6.92
23.7 ± 1.67
10.7 ± 2.90
43.8 ± 2.17

(1.34; 4.23)

22.0 ± 2.24
180.5 ± 4.55
77.6 ± 8.59
23.8 ± 2.23
12.7 ± 3.46
44.4 ± 2.92

DII (Dietary Inﬂammatory Index), BMI (Body Mass Index), Waist-to-Height Ratio (WHtR).

Table 2 displays the amount of energy, macro and micronutrients consumed by study
participants. Only the DII components found in the students’ diet were included in
this table. It was observed that diets with different DIIs provided similar amounts of
calories, but differed signiﬁcantly in the content of many nutrients. Participants whose
diets showed the most anti-inﬂammatory effects consumed signiﬁcantly more protein
(p < 0.05), magnesium (p < 0.001), iron (p < 0.001), zinc (p < 0.001), antioxidant vitamins
A, E, C (p < 0.001), B vitamins (p < 0.001), thiamine (p < 0.05), riboﬂavin (p < 0.001), niacin
(p < 0.001) and B6 (p < 0.001) and cholesterol (p < 0.05) compared to others. Moreover, it was
noticed that the diets from the Q1 group were characterized by a signiﬁcantly higher amount
of saturated fatty acids than diets from the Q4 group (p < 0.0—p < 0.001). In turn, those
whose diets had the most pro-inﬂammatory effects (Q4 group) consumed the least mono-

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 6884

5 of 11

and polyunsaturated fatty acids and ﬁber of all participants (p < 0.05) (Table 2). In addition,
analyzing the consumption of omega-3 and omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids, it was
found that men following the most anti-inﬂammatory diet consumed signiﬁcantly more
omega-3 fatty acids compared to those with the most pro-inﬂammatory diets (2.38 ± 0.78 g
vs. 1.54 ± 0.67 g, p < 0.001).

Table 2. Daily energy, macronutrient, and micronutrient intake in participants (mean ± SD).

DII (min; max)

Energy [kcal]
Protein [g]
Fat [g]
Carbohydrates [g]
Magnesium [mg]
Iron [mg]
Zinc [mg]
Vitamin A [µg]
Beta-carotene [µg]
Vitamin E [mg]
Thiamine [mg]
Riboﬂavin [mg]
Niacin [mg]
Vitamin B6 [mg]
Vitamin C [mg]
Saturated fatty acids [g]
Monounsaturated fatty acids [g]
Polyunsaturated fatty acids [g]
Cholesterol [mg]
Dietary ﬁber [g]

Q1n = 24 (25%)
Most Anti-Inﬂammatory
Diet

(−3.39; −1.05)

2726.9 ± 372.14
146.1 ± 25.56 A*
100.2 ± 27.40
334.4 ± 58.00
477.1 ± 88.59 A***
17.7 ± 3.53 A***
16.8 ± 3.86 A***
2403.1 ± 1812.39 A***
8840.0 ± 5722.61 A***
16.4 ± 4.82 A*
2.1 ± 1.59 A*
3.3 ± 2.38 A***
35.4 ± 16.97 A***
3.7 ± 2.47 A***
247.4 ± 163.58 A***
38.2 ± 13.76
40.1 ± 10.55
12.6 ± 4.13
630.2 ± 268.32 A*
31.1 ± 5.31 A***

Q2–Q3n = 49 (50%)

(−1.03; 1.30)

2697.2 ± 393.93
135.6 ± 43.63
100.8 ± 18.66
319.6 ± 62.06
354.4 ± 92.31 C**
13.4 ± 4.68 C*
13.2 ± 6.69 C**
1101.5 ± 400.59
3304.7 ± 1809.25
13.1 ± 4.26 C*
1.5 ± 0.43
2.1 ± 0.83
21.6 ± 13.83 C**
2.2 ± 0.83 C***
104.5 ± 97.76
35.9 ± 11.20
39.6 ± 12.03 C*
15.3 ± 5.45 C*
457.5 ± 263.80
23.8 ± 4.70 C*

Q4n = 22 (25%)
Most Pro-Inﬂammatory
Diet

(1.34; 4.23)

2768.7 ± 588.94
120.6 ± 32.32 B***
110.1 ± 30.89
327.8 ± 80.54
271.4 ± 61.13 B***
10.8 ± 3.03 B***
9.6 ± 2.58 B***
962.2 ± 502.44 B***
2253.7 ± 1368.87 B***
10.5 ± 3.38 B***
1.4 ± 0.35 B**
1.6 ± 0.46 B***
12.9 ± 6.08 B***
1.5 ± 0.41 B***
76.9 ± 30.83 B***
28.8 ± 12.41 B*
30.8 ± 11.03 B*
12.0 ± 4.00 B*
370.1 ± 103.79 B**
20.4 ± 2.57 B***

A—signiﬁcant differences between Q1 vs. Q2–Q3; B—signiﬁcant differences between Q1 vs. Q4; C—signiﬁcant
differences between Q2–Q3 vs. Q4; * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001.

In all groups, the anti-inﬂammatory DII values were determined mostly by ﬁber,
vitamin B6 and vitamin E (Figure 1). In the Q1 group, the anti-inﬂammatory nature of the
diet was also inﬂuenced by vitamin C, vitamin A, beta-carotene, zinc and magnesium. The
same minerals had a signiﬁcant impact on the health-promoting DII values in men from the
Q2–Q3 group. Conversely, total calorie intake and the amount of consumed fat, including
cholesterol, increased the pro-inﬂammatory properties of the diets of all the surveyed men.
The consumption of saturated fatty acids showed such an effect only in the diet of subjects
from the Q1 and Q2–Q3 groups. It was also observed that the pro-inﬂammatory DII in men
from Q4 group was signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by vitamin C and beta-carotene (Figure 2).

The highest concentration of hs-CRP protein was observed in men from the Q4 group,
whose diet was described as the most pro-inﬂammatory. However, this difference reached
statistical signiﬁcance only compared to the Q2–Q3 group (p < 0.05) (Figure 2).

There was no statistically signiﬁcant correlation between the hs-CRP protein concen-
tration and the DII score in the group following the most anti-inﬂammatory diet (Q1) as
well as in the group following the most pro-inﬂammatory diet (Q4) (Table 3). However, a
statistically signiﬁcant relationship was found only between this dietary index and body
fat (%) in groups Q1 and Q2–Q3 (p < 0.05) (Figure 3).

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 6884

6 of 11

Figure 1. The overall inﬂammatory effect of energy, macro and micronutrients (mean value).
A—signiﬁcant differences between Q1 vs. Q2–Q3; B—signiﬁcant differences between Q1 vs. Q4;
C—signiﬁcant differences between Q2–Q3 vs. Q4; * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 11   Figure 1. The overall inflammatory effect of energy, macro and micronutrients (mean value). A—significant differences between Q1 vs. Q2–Q3; B—significant differences between Q1 vs. Q4; C—significant differences between Q2–Q3 vs. Q4; * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 6884

7 of 11

Figure 2. Protein C reactive (hs-CRP) concentration in men with different DII (median ± quartile).;
C—signiﬁcant differences between Q2–Q3–Q4; *—p < 0.05.

Table 3. Spearman’s simple correlation coefﬁcients for hs-CRP, DII, FAT and WHtR.

Q1n = 24 (25%)
Most Anti-Inﬂammatory
Diet

Q2–Q3n = 49 (50%)

Q4n = 22 (25%)
Most Pro-Inﬂammatory
Diet

0.209
p = 0.326
−0.159
p = 0.456
−0.044
p = 0.839

hs-CRP [mg/l]

−0.049
p = 739
−0.071
p = 0.629
−0.135
p = 0.355

0.048
p = 0.829
−0236
p = 0.278
−0.166
p = 0.449

DII

FAT %

WHtR %

* p < 0.05.

Figure 3. Correlation between DII and WHtR (left) and FAT (right) content in men with different DII.

4. Discussion

Nutrition has a signiﬁcant impact on the health and psychophysical development of
every human being, from the prenatal period to later old age. An appropriate diet is con-
ducive to proper course of the growth process, maintaining a normal body weight in adult
life and protecting against the effects of aging (e.g., sarcopenia, osteoporosis) [29–31]. It is
well known that proper nutrition is also important in the prevention of numerous diseases:
metabolic (e.g., obesity, diabetes), respiratory system (e.g., asthma), circulatory system

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 11   Figure 2. Protein C reactive (hs-CRP) concentration in men with different DII (median ± quartile).; C—significant differences between Q2–Q3–Q4; *—p < 0.05. The highest concentration of hs-CRP protein was observed in men from the Q4 group, whose diet was described as the most pro-inflammatory. However, this difference reached statistical significance only compared to the Q2–Q3 group (p < 0.05) (Figure 2). There was no statistically significant correlation between the hs-CRP protein concen-tration and the DII score in the group following the most anti-inflammatory diet (Q1) as well as in the group following the most pro-inflammatory diet (Q4) (Table 3.). However, a statistically significant relationship was found only between this dietary index and body fat (%) in groups Q1 and Q2–Q3 (p < 0.05) (Figure 3).  Figure 3. Correlation between DII and WHtR (left) and FAT (right) content in men with different DII. Table 3. Spearman’s simple correlation coefficients for hs-CRP, DII, FAT and WHtR.  Q1n = 24 (25%) Most  Anti-Inflammatory Diet Q2–Q3n = 49 (50%) Q4n = 22 (25%) Most Pro-Inflammatory Diet hs-CRP [mg/l] DII 0.209 p = 0.326 −0.049 p = 739 0.048 p = 0.829 FAT % −0.159 p = 0.456 −0.071 p = 0.629 −0236 p = 0.278 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 11   Figure 2. Protein C reactive (hs-CRP) concentration in men with different DII (median ± quartile).; C—significant differences between Q2–Q3–Q4; *—p < 0.05. The highest concentration of hs-CRP protein was observed in men from the Q4 group, whose diet was described as the most pro-inflammatory. However, this difference reached statistical significance only compared to the Q2–Q3 group (p < 0.05) (Figure 2). There was no statistically significant correlation between the hs-CRP protein concen-tration and the DII score in the group following the most anti-inflammatory diet (Q1) as well as in the group following the most pro-inflammatory diet (Q4) (Table 3.). However, a statistically significant relationship was found only between this dietary index and body fat (%) in groups Q1 and Q2–Q3 (p < 0.05) (Figure 3).  Figure 3. Correlation between DII and WHtR (left) and FAT (right) content in men with different DII. Table 3. Spearman’s simple correlation coefficients for hs-CRP, DII, FAT and WHtR.  Q1n = 24 (25%) Most  Anti-Inflammatory Diet Q2–Q3n = 49 (50%) Q4n = 22 (25%) Most Pro-Inflammatory Diet hs-CRP [mg/l] DII 0.209 p = 0.326 −0.049 p = 739 0.048 p = 0.829 FAT % −0.159 p = 0.456 −0.071 p = 0.629 −0236 p = 0.278 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 6884

8 of 11

(e.g., atherosclerosis, heart disease), as well as cancer and mental diseases (e.g., depres-
sion) [18,32–35]. Conversely, bad nutritional habits contribute to increased inﬂammation in
the body, which leads to the development of these diseases [36,37].

There is no doubt that physically active people should be characterized by a properly
balanced and healthy diet [38]. The aim of this study was to calculate the Diet Inﬂammatory
Index for young men with moderate and regular physical activity and to use it to evaluate
the impact of diet on their health. The DII values observed in this study ranged from
−3.39 to 4.23. This range of DII score was comparable to those reported by Akbaraly
et al. (−3.35 to 4.23), who studied the relationship between DII and recurrent depressive
symptoms in a large British population of adult men and women aged 35–55 years [39].
In comparison, the diets of obese men and women aged 43.4 ± 10.9 years studied by
Abdurahman et al. [40] were characterized by a DII ranging from −4.42 to 3.34, whereas
in Iranian adults participating in the Salari-Moghaddam et al. project, which assessed
the relationship between DII and psychological disorders, it was found that DII values
ranged from −4.49 to 5.39 [41]. It seems that the differences in the DII values observed
by various authors can be largely explained by the number of components included in
the DII calculations. This was the case of our study, in which, due to the limitations of
the program used to analyze nutritional interviews, 35 out of 45 components proposed by
Shivappa et al. [18] were used to calculate the DII. However, due to the fact that the “Diet
5.0” program is the recommended tool to assess the diet of the Polish population [42], it
was decided to use it in the research. Moreover, it should be emphasized that in this study
the pro-inﬂammatory nature of the diet was assessed only in men, while the authors of the
above-mentioned studies analyzed the values of DII in both sexes.

It is worth quoting here the results of the analysis by Steck et al., who showed that the
DII value for fast food diets is 4.0, and for these Mediterranean diet is −4.0 [19]. Comparing
this to the DII values obtained in the participants of our own research, it can be concluded
that among them were people (group Q4; DII: 1.34; 4.23) with a diet that was unfavorable
to their physical ﬁtness. There is much evidence in the literature that consumption of
a pro-inﬂammatory diet may have a negative impact on physical performance due to
the occurrence of insulin resistance, faster development of muscle fatigue, as well as
prolongation of post-exercise regeneration [43].

This study showed that young men whose diets had different inﬂammatory potentials
did not differ in body shape and composition. The values of BMI and body fat content in
all studied groups were within the normal range for young, regularly physically active
men [44]. This can be explained by a similar intake of calories in the diet by the surveyed
men from the quartile groups distinguished on the basis of the DII value. The similar diet
energy consumption was probably related to the fact that all participants of this study were
students of the same university, following the same program, requiring a similar amount
of physical effort. It should be assumed that the energy expenditure related to the physical
education program of studies makes the majority of students lean. However, it is disturbing
to ﬁnd that some students’ diets with pro-inﬂammatory DII values may reduce the health
beneﬁts of an active lifestyle.

The differences in the DII values of the students’ diets resulted from their different
composition. The anti-inﬂammatory nature of the students’ diet was primarily determined
by the higher consumption of protein, antioxidant vitamins, B vitamins, zinc, iron and
magnesium. Other authors drew similar conclusions, stating that a properly composed
anti-inﬂammatory diet should rely on a high intake of vitamins, minerals and substances of
plant origin (e.g., a macrobiotic diet) [19]. Our own research also showed that insufﬁcient
ﬁber intake makes the diet more pro-inﬂammatory. The observation that insufﬁcient
consumption of monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids applies to diets with a
higher DII also conﬁrms the reports of other researchers [45]. Therefore, this study shows
that the diets of young active men are characterized by deﬁciencies of these nutrients, which
according to the literature negatively affects their health and physical performance [46].
However, the analysis of the physically active young men’s diets also gave quite surprising

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 6884

9 of 11

results. An example is the ﬁnding that vitamin C and beta-carotene increased the pro-
inﬂammatory nature of the diet in most participants. This observation is difﬁcult to explain,
thus further investigations are needed.

As expected, the highest levels of hs-CRP were found in men whose diets had the
highest DII values (Q4 group). Although previous studies mostly conﬁrmed the existence
of a relationship between DII and inﬂammatory markers [18,47], this study did not show
a signiﬁcant relationship between hs-CRP and DII score in any of the groups. Perhaps
this was due to the fact that our participants were healthy people, with generally low
hs-CRP values, within the normal range, whereas a statistically signiﬁcant relationship was
observed between the DII and the body fat content, which is considered to be an indicator
of the nutritional status.

The present study had some limitations to consider. First, the study participants were
young, physically active men, thus the obtained results may not be generalized. Second,
herbs and spices were excluded in dietary recall cause to lack of intake information. Third,
there was a small sample size compared to other DII studies (men n = 94).

Besides these limitations, this study has several advantages. First, despite the simi-
larities in anthropometric measurements between groups, differences in DII values were
noticed. This may indicate that DII may be the ﬁrst and easy tool to detect health prob-
lems despite the lack of visual symptoms (e.g., obesity). Second, our results conﬁrmed
that consuming diet with a high DII increases the risk of disease also in young physically
active people.

5. Conclusions

To our current knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study in which the DII for young Polish
people was calculated. The Dietary Inﬂammatory Index is very promising as it can detect
any inﬂammation depending on the diet one has. Due to its low cost, this method allows for
a quick assessment of the quality of the diet and its impact on health. However, additional
studies on the relationship with dietary inﬂammation are needed.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.K. and A.P.; methodology, A.K. and A.P.; software,
A.K. and D.I.; validation, A.K. and A.P.; formal analysis, A.K. and D.I.; investigation, A.K., A.P.
and D.I.; resources, A.K. and A.P.; data curation, A.K. and A.P.; writing—original draft preparation,
A.K., A.P. and D.I.; writing—review and editing, A.K., A.P. and D.I.; visualization, D.I.; supervision,
A.K.; project administration, A.K.; funding acquisition, A.K. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education (https://www.
gov.pl/web/nauka/ accessed on 29 April 2022) in 2020/2022 as part of the Scientiﬁc School of the
University of Physical Education in Warsaw—SN No. 5 “Biomedical determinants of physical ﬁtness
and sports training in adult population”.

Institutional Review Board Statement: This study was conducted according to the guidelines of
the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Ethics Committee of Jozef Piłsudski University of
Physical Education in Warsaw.

Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.
2.

3.

4.

Kotas, M.E.; Medzhitov, R. Homeostasis, inﬂammation, and disease susceptibility. Cell 2015, 160, 816–827. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Furman, D.; Campisi, J.; Verdin, E.; Carrera-Bastos, P.; Targ, S.; Franceschi, C.; Ferrucci, L.; Gilroy, D.W.; Fasano, A.; Miller,
G.W.; et al. Chronic inﬂammation in the etiology of disease across the life span. Nat. Med. 2019, 25, 1822–1832. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Straub, R.H. The brain and immune system prompt energy shortage in chronic inﬂammation and ageing. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol.
2017, 13, 743–751. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Song, X.D.; Wang, Y.N.; Zhang, A.L.; Liu, B. Advances in research on the interaction between inﬂammation and cancer. J. Int.
Med. Res. 2020, 48, 300060519895347. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 6884

10 of 11

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Zatterale, F.; Longo, M.; Naderi, J.; Raciti, G.A.; Desiderio, A.; Miele, C.; Beguinot, F. Chronic adipose tissue inﬂammation linking
obesity to insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. Front. Physiol. 2020, 10, 1607. [CrossRef]
Ahluwalia, N.; Andreeva, VA.; Kesse-Guyot, E.; Hercberg, S. Dietary patterns, inﬂammation and the metabolic syndrome. Diabetes
Metab. 2013, 39, 99–110. [CrossRef]
Lee, I.M.; Shiroma, E.J.; Lobelo, F.; Puska, P.; Blair, S.N.; Katzmarzyk, P.T.; Lancet Physical Activity Series Working Group. Effect
of physical inactivity on major noncommunicable diseases worldwide: An analysis of burden of disease and life expectancy.
Lancet 2012, 380, 219–222. [CrossRef]
Tiryaki-Sonmez, G.; Vatansever, S.; Olcucu, B.; Schoenfeld, B. Obesity, food intake and exercise: Relationship with ghrelin. Biomed.
Hum. Kinet. 2015, 7, 116–124. [CrossRef]
Kawai, T.; Autieri, M.V.; Scalia, R. Adipose tissue inﬂammation and metabolic dysfunction in obesity. Am. J. Physiol. Cell-Physiol.
2021, 320, C375–C391. [CrossRef]

10. Barbalho, S.M.; Prado Neto, E.V.; De Alvares Goulart, R.; Bechara, M.D.; Baisi Chagas, E.F.; Audi, M.; Guissoni Campos, L.M.;
Landgraf Guiger, E.; Buchaim, R.L.; Buchaim, D.V.; et al. Myokines: A descriptive review. J. Sports Med. Phys. Fit. 2020, 60,
1583–1590. [CrossRef]

11. Giudice, J.; Taylor, J.M. Muscle as a paracrine and endocrine organ. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 2017, 34, 49–55. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Leal, L.G.; Lopes, M.A.; Batista, M.L., Jr. Physical Exercise-induced myokines and muscle-adipose tissue crosstalk: A review of

current knowledge and the implications for health and metabolic diseases. Front. Physiol. 2018, 24, 1307. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

13. Kannan, P.; Cheung, K.K.; Wui-Man Lau, B. Does aerobic exercise induced-analgesia occur through hormone and inﬂammatory

cytokine-mediated mechanisms in primary dysmenorrhea? Med. Hypotheses 2019, 123, 50–54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

14. Wirth, M.D.; Hébert, J.R.; Shivappa, N.; Hand, G.A.; Hurley, T.G.; Drenowatz, C.; McMahon, D.; Shook, R.P.; Blair, S.N. Anti-
inﬂammatory Dietary Inﬂammatory Index scores are associated with healthier scores on other dietary indices. Nutr. Res. 2016, 36,
214–219. [CrossRef]

15. Malesza, I.J.; Malesza, M.; Walkowiak, J.; Mussin, N.; Walkowiak, D.; Aringazina, R.; Bartkowiak-Wieczorek, J.; M ˛adry, E.
High-Fat, Western-Style Diet, Systemic Inﬂammation, and Gut Microbiota: A Narrative Review. Cells 2021, 10, 3164. [CrossRef]
16. Hermsdorff, H.H.; Zulet, M.A.; Puchau, B.; Martínez, J.A. Fruit and vegetable consumption and proinﬂammatory gene expression

17.

18.

19.

from peripheral blood mononuclear cells in young adults: A translational study. Nutr. Metab. 2010, 7, 42. [CrossRef]
Soﬁ, F.; Abbate, R.; Gensini, G.F.; Casini, A. Accruing evidence on beneﬁts of adherence to the Mediterranean diet on health: An
updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2010, 92, 1189–1196. [CrossRef]
Shivappa, N.; Steck, S.E.; Hurley, T.G.; Hussey, J.R.; Ma, Y.; Ockene, I.S.; Tabung, F.; Hébert, J.R. A population-based dietary
inﬂammatory index predicts levels of C-reactive protein in the Seasonal Variation of Blood Cholesterol Study (SEASONS). Pub.
Health Nutr. 2013, 17, 1825–1833. [CrossRef]
Steck, S.E.; Shivappa, N.; Tabung, F.K.; Harmon, B.E.; Wirth, M.D.; Hurley, T.G.; Hebert, J.R. The dietary inﬂammatory index: A
new tool for assessing diet quality based on inﬂammatory potential. Digest 2014, 49, 1–10.

20. Tabung, F.K.; Steck, S.E.; Zhang, J.; Ma, Y.; Liese, A.D.; Agalliu, I.; Hingle, M.; Hou, L.; Hurley, T.G.; Jiao, L.; et al. Construct
validation of the dietary inﬂammatory index among postmenopausal women. Ann. Epidemiol. 2015, 25, 398–405. [CrossRef]
21. Kotemori, A.; Sawada, N.; Iwasaki, M.; Yamaji, T.; Shivappa, N.; Hebert, J.R.; Ishihara, J.; Inoue, M.; Tsugane, S. JPHC FFQ

Validation Study Group. Nutrition 2020, 69, 110569. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

22. Neufcourt, L.; Assmann, K.E.; Fezeu, L.K.; Touvier, M.; Graffouillère, L.; Shivappa, N.; Hébert, J.R.; Wirth, M.D.; Hercberg,
S.; Galan, P.; et al. Prospective Association Between the Dietary Inﬂammatory Index and Cardiovascular Diseases in the
SUpplémentation en VItamines et Minéraux AntioXydants (SU.VI.MAX) Cohort. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 2016, 5, e002735. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

23. Harmon, B.E.; Wirth, M.D.; Boushey, C.J.; Wilkens, L.R.; Draluck, E.; Shivappa, N.; Steck, S.E.; Hofseth, L.; Haiman, C.A.; Le
Marchand, L.; et al. The Dietary Inﬂammatory Index is associated with colorectal cancer risk in the multiethnic cohort. J. Nutr.
2017, 147, 430–438. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

24. Vissers, L.E.T.; Waller, M.; van der Schouw, Y.T.; Hébert, J.R.; Shivappa, N.; Schoenaker, D.A.J.M.; Mishra, G.D. A pro-inﬂammatory
diet is associated with increased risk of developing hypertension among middle-aged women. Nutr. Metab. Cardiovasc. Dis. 2017,
27, 564–570. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

25. Al-Awwad, N.J.; Al-Sayyed, H.F.; Zeinah, Z.A.; Tayyem, R.F. Dietary and lifestyle habits among university students at different

academic years. Clin. Nutr. ESPEN 2021, 44, 236–242. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

26. Beaudry, K.M.; Ludwa, I.A.; Thomas, A.M.; Ward, W.E.; Falk, B.; Josse, A.R. First-year university is associated with greater body
weight, body composition and adverse dietary changes in males than females. PLoS ONE 2019, 14, e0218554. [CrossRef]

27. American Council on Exercise (ACE). What are the Guidelines for Percentage of Body Fat Loss? 2009. Available online: https://
www.aceﬁtness.org/education-and-resources/lifestyle/blog/112/what-are-the-guidelines-for-percentage-of-body-fat-loss (ac-
cessed on 29 April 2022).
Szponar, L.; Wolnicka, K.; Rychlik, E. Album Fotograﬁi Produktów i Potraw; Instytut ˙Zywno´sci i ˙Zywienia: Warsaw, Polska, 2000.
28.
29. Giacalone, D.; Wendin, K.; Kremer, S.; Frøst, M.B.; Bredie, W.L.P.; Olsson, V.; Otto, M.H.; Skjoldborg, S.; Lindberg, U.; Risvik, E.
Health and quality of life in an aging population—Food and beyond. Food Qual. Prefer. 2016, 47 (Pt B), 166–170. [CrossRef]
30. Hawkes, C.; Smith, T.G.; Jewell, J.; Wardle, J.; Hammond, R.A.; Friel, S.; Thow, A.M.; Kain, J. Smart food policies for obesity

prevention. Lancet 2015, 385, 2410–2421. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 6884

11 of 11

31. Miyake, Y.; Tanaka, K.; Okubo, H.; Sasaki, S.; Arakawa, M. Maternal consumption of dairy products, calcium, and vitamin D

during pregnancy and infantile allergic disorders. Ann. Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2014, 113, 82–87. [CrossRef]

33.

32. Neufcourt, L.; Assmann, K.E.; Fezeu, L.K.; Touvier, M.; Graffouillère, L.; Shivappa, N.; Hébert, J.R.; Wirth, M.D.; Hercberg, S.;
Galan, P.; et al. Prospective association between the dietary inﬂammatory index and metabolic syndrome: Findings from the
SU.VI.MAX study. Nutr. Metab. Cardiovasc. Dis. 2015, 25, 988–996. [CrossRef]
Sánchez-Villegas, A.; Henríquez-Sánchez, P.; Ruiz-Canela, M.; Lahortiga, F.; Molero, P.; Toledo, E.; Martínez-González, M.A. A
longitudinal analysis of diet quality scores and the risk of incident depression in the SUN Project. BMC Med. 2015, 13, 197–199.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Shivappa, N.; Bosetti, C.; Zucchetto, A.; Serraino, D.; La Vecchia, C.; Hébert, J.R. Dietary inﬂammatory index and risk of pancreatic
cancer in an Italian case-control study. Br. J. Nutr. 2015, 113, 292–298. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

34.

35. Wood, L.G.; Shivappa, N.; Berthon, B.S.; Gibson, P.G.; Hebert, J.R. Dietary inﬂammatory index is related to asthma risk, lung

function and systemic inﬂammation in asthma. Clin. Exp. Allergy 2015, 45, 177–183. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

36. Arouca, A.B.; Santaliestra-Pasías, A.M.; Moreno, L.A.; Marcos, A.; Widhalm, K.; Molnár, D.; Manios, Y.; Gottrand, F.; Kafatos,
A.; Kersting, M.; et al. Diet as a moderator in the association of sedentary behaviors with inﬂammatory biomarkers among
adolescents in the HELENA study. Eur. J. Nutr. 2019, 58, 2051–2065. [CrossRef]

37. Bärebring, L.; Winkvist, A.; Gjertsson, I.; Lindqvist, H.M. Poor dietary quality is associated with increased inﬂammation in

Swedish patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Nutrients 2018, 10, 1535. [CrossRef]

38. Daskalopoulou, C.; Stubbs, B.; Kralj, C.; Koukounari, A.; Prince, M.; Prina, A.M. Physical activity and healthy ageing: A systematic

review and meta-analysis of longitudinal cohort studies. Ageing Res. Rev. 2017, 38, 6–17. [CrossRef]

39. Akbaraly, T.; Kerlau, C.; Wyart, M.; Chevallier, N.; Ndiaye, L.; Shivappa, N.; Hébert, J.R.; Kivimäki, M. Dietary inﬂammatory
index and recurrence of depressive symptoms: Results from the Whitehall II Study. Clin. Psychol. Sci. 2016, 4, 1125–1134.
[CrossRef]

41.

40. Abdurahman, A.A.; Azadbakhat, L.; Rasouli, M.; Chamari, M.; Qorbani, M.; Dorosty, A.R. Association of dietary inﬂammatory
index with metabolic proﬁle in metabolically healthy and unhealthy obese people. Nutr. Diet. 2019, 76, 192–198. [CrossRef]
Salari-Moghaddam, A.; Keshteli, A.H.; Afshar, H.; Esmaillzadeh, A.; Adibi, P. Association between dietary inﬂammatory index
and psychological proﬁle in adults. Clin. Nutr. 2019, 38, 2360–2368. [CrossRef]
Jarosz, M.; Bułhak-Jachymczyk, B. Normy ˙Zywienia dla Populacji Polskiej—Nowelizacja; Instytut ˙Zywno´sci i ˙Zywienia: Warsaw,
Poland, 2012.

42.

43. Padina, A.C.; Hébertc, J.R.; Woodya, A.; Wilsona, S.J.; Shivappac, N.; Belurya, M.A.; Malarkeya, W.B.; Sheridana, J.F.; Kiecolt-
Glasera, J.K. A proinﬂammatory diet is associated with inﬂammatory gene expression among healthy, non-obese adults: Can
social ties protect against the risks? Brain Behav. Immun. 2019, 82, 36–44. [CrossRef]

44. Nuttall, F.Q. Body Mass Index: Obesity, BMI, and Health: A Critical Review. Nutr. Today 2015, 50, 117–128. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Marion-Letellier, R.; Savoye, G.; Ghosh, S. Polyunsaturated fatty acids and inﬂammation. IUBMB Life 2015, 67, 659–667. [CrossRef]

46.

[PubMed]
Sechi, G.; Sechi, E.; Fois, C.; Kumar, N. Advances in clinical determinants and neurological manifestations of B vitamin deﬁciency
in adults. Nutr. Rev. 2016, 74, 281–300. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

47. Cavicchia, P.P.; Steck, S.E.; Hurley, T.G.; Hussey, J.R.; Ma, Y.; Ockene, I.S.; Hébert, J.R. A new dietary inﬂammatory index predicts

interval changes in serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein. J. Nutr. 2009, 139, 2365–2372. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
