---
pmid: 37513549
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/37513549
title: Intermittent Fasting Promotes Weight Loss without Decreasing Performance in Taekwondo.
---

Article
Intermittent Fasting Promotes Weight Loss without Decreasing
Performance in Taekwondo

Ronaldo Angelo Dias da Silva 1,2, Leszek Antoni Szmuchrowski 2, João Paulo Pereira Rosa 3,
Marcos Antônio Pereira dos Santos 4
Francisco de Assis Dias Martins Júnior 1 and Marcos Daniel Motta Drummond 1,2,*

, Marco Túlio de Mello 5

, Lucas Savoi 1, Yves Ferreira Porto 1,

1

2

Laboratório de Nutrição e Treinamento Esportivo, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais,
Belo Horizonte 31270-901, MG, Brazil; ronaldoangelo@ufmg.br (R.A.D.d.S.); lucassavoi@hotmail.com (L.S.);
yves.porto@yahoo.com.br (Y.F.P.); francisco.junior@aluno.ufop.edu.br (F.d.A.D.M.J.)
Laboratório de Avaliação da Carga, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais,
Belo Horizonte 31270-901, MG, Brazil; leszek_br@yahoo.com.br

3 Department of Physical Education, Institute of Biosciences, São Paulo State University (UNESP),

Rio Claro 13506-900, SP, Brazil; jpseipai@hotmail.com

4 Nucleus of Study in Physiology Applied to Performance and Health, Department of Biophysics

and Physiology, Federal University of Piauí, Teresina 64049-550, PI, Brazil; marcosedﬁsio@gmail.com

5 Centro de Estudos em Psicobiologia e Exercício, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais,

Belo Horizonte 31270-901, MG, Brazil; tmello@demello.net.br

* Correspondence: marcoszang@ufmg.br; Tel.: +55-31-3409-5000

Abstract: Intermittent fasting (IF) is commonly used by combat sports athletes for weight loss.
However, IF can decrease performance. This study aimed to investigate the effect of IF on total body
mass (TBM) and Taekwondo performance. Nine athletes (seven male, two female; 18.4 ± 3.3 years)
underwent 4 weeks of 12 h IF. TBM, countermovement jump (CMJ), mean kicks (MK), and total
number of kicks (TNK) were compared weekly. Performance was measured in the fed state (FED)
and fast state (FAST). Results showed decreased TBM in week 1 (62.20 ± 6.56 kg; p = 0.001) and
week 2 (62.38 ± 6.83 kg; p = 0.022) compared to pre-intervention (63.58 ± 6.57 kg), stabilizing in
week 3 (62.42 ± 6.12 kg), and no signiﬁcant change in week 4 (63.36 ± 6.20 kg). CMJ performance in
week 1 was lower in FED (35.26 ± 7.15 cm) than FAST (37.36 ± 6.77 cm; p = 0.003), but in week 3,
FED (38.24 ± 6.45 cm) was higher than FAST (35.96 ± 5.05 cm; p = 0.047). No signiﬁcant differences
were found in MK and TNK in FSKTmult. RPE, KDI, and HR were similar between FED and FAST
(p < 0.05). [LAC] was higher post-test compared to pre-test (p = 0.001), with higher concentrations
in FED than FAST (p = 0.020). BG was higher in FED than FAST (p < 0.05) before physical tests.
Therefore, IF promotes decreased TBM without decreasing performance.

Keywords: sports nutrition science; martial arts; weight loss; sports combat; elite athletes

1. Introduction

In combat sports, there are numerous strategies for rapid reduction of total body
mass (TBM), such as water restriction, use of laxatives, immersion in hot water baths,
sauna sessions, increased quantity and duration of training sessions, and performing
exercises with heavy clothing and/or plastic suits [1]. However, these strategies can lead to
detrimental effects on athletic performance, including muscle mass reduction, decreased
overall and speciﬁc endurance, impaired training adaptations, decreased concentration
capacity, difﬁculty in decision-making, mood alterations such as increased irritability
and demotivation, and increased discomfort and subjective perception of effort following
training sessions [2]. Therefore, the adoption of nutritional strategies such as hypocaloric
diets and intermittent fasting can be less harmful alternatives for reducing body mass in
this population.

Citation: da Silva, R.A.D.;

Szmuchrowski, L.A.; Rosa, J.P.P.;

Santos, M.A.P.d.; de Mello, M.T.;

Savoi, L.; Porto, Y.F.; de Assis Dias

Martins Júnior, F.; Drummond,

M.D.M. Intermittent Fasting

Promotes Weight Loss without

Decreasing Performance in

Taekwondo. Nutrients 2023, 15, 3131.

https://doi.org/10.3390/

nu15143131

Academic Editors: Bart Roelands

and Stephen P. Bailey

Received: 6 June 2023

Revised: 3 July 2023

Accepted: 12 July 2023

Published: 13 July 2023

Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

Nutrients 2023, 15, 3131. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15143131

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients

nutrientsNutrients 2023, 15, 3131

2 of 12

Intermittent fasting (IF) is the partial or total abstinence of food intake for a predeter-
mined period of 12 to 48 h with little or no caloric intake interspersed with non-restricted
feeding [3]. Therefore, it is common for Taekwondo athletes to use it as a nutritional strat-
egy for weight loss [4,5]. In eutrophic individuals, this strategy can decrease the TBM by 2%
within a few weeks [6]. Such a lower TBM may result from behavioral and physiological
changes that regulate appetite and result in lower caloric intake in the hours of fasting [7]
that is not compensated in the non-restricted feeding period [8].

However, fasting exerts some effects that might lower sports performance, such as
sleep disorders, hypohydration, low motivation, and reduced muscle glycogen stores [9,10].
The caloric restriction that is common in fasting can lower the mitochondrial intrinsic
activity without altering the mitochondrial content in skeletal human muscle [11]. Moreover,
longer IF periods can increase cortisol levels and stimulate hunger, which, in turn, can
cause the TBM to be either maintained or increased [12].

Despite the various IF protocols [3], several studies have reported solely the effects
of Ramadan fasting in combat sports [10,13–18]. Some studies have found no effect of
Ramadan fasting on performance in combat sports and a non-signiﬁcant decrease in TBM
measured before, during, and at the end of Ramadan [10,14]. However, in others, Ramadan
fasting decreased performance in combat sports [13,15–18]. Such a ﬁnding was reported
especially upon the application of tests in the afternoon, thus with accumulated fasting,
followed by lower TBM and energy intake [13,15–18]. In Taekwondo, Memari et al. [17]
found that Ramadan fasting not only decreased the TBM but also the performance in agility
Taekwondo tests. Pak et al. [18] applied a speciﬁc taekwondo test during IF and reported
a lower number of kicks at the end of Ramadan. Therefore, studies on the effect of IF on
weight loss and sports performance show conﬂicting results. However, Ramadan does not
represent the reality of Taekwondo athletes from several countries. In this regard, the IF
protocol adopted by these athletes is different and requires speciﬁc investigations.

Silva et al. [7] investigated the acute effect of a 12 h fast with breakfast omission on
weight loss and performance in taekwondo athletes. The results showed acute weight loss
and non-signiﬁcant effects on performance in countermovement jump (CMJ) height and
frequency speed of kick test multiple series (FSKTmult). We could not ﬁnd any studies
that investigated IF in Taekwondo training other than those that concerned Ramadan. In
this sense, considering that even though IF can reduce TBM in Taekwondo athletes, the
literature reports are limited regarding its inﬂuence on training performance; therefore, the
potential chronic effects of IF on Taekwondo should be further investigated.

Accordingly, given the results of previous studies, our hypothesis is that IF can
promote weight loss without reducing performance in Taekwondo. Therefore, this study
aimed to examine the effect of a 12 h IF for four weeks on weight loss and performance
in Taekwondo.

2. Methods
2.1. Subjects

Nine Taekwondo athletes (seven male and two female individuals) (18.4 ± 3.3 years)
participated in this study, with a mean of 9.2 ± 3.4 years of experience in the modality
and participation in international championships. Our inclusion criteria covered those
who were competing and kept their body masses stable for at least two months before
the research period. In addition, the athletes should be aiming for a lower TBM to adjust
to the weight category. Thus, our sample represents a speciﬁc category of Taekwondo
athletes. Additionally, the athletes must have been undergoing an isocaloric diet before
the intervention period, and no injuries in the lower limbs must have occurred over the
past three months. Our exclusion criteria considered the volunteers whose TBM had no
variation over the ﬁrst two weeks of study and who suffered any joint and/or muscular
injury in the lower limbs during the study period. In addition, all athletes who did not
adhere to the 12 h fast over the four weeks of data collection were also excluded. This study

Nutrients 2023, 15, 3131

3 of 12

was approved by the Ethics and Research Committee of the Federal University of Minas
Gerais (protocol: 2.582.067).

2.2. Experimental Design

This study proposes an experimental paired trial covering a total of six weeks. Initially,
the ﬁrst two weeks covered the familiarization, reliability, and performance of the baseline
(BL) measure. In the following four weeks, the athletes performed the same BL tests but in
eight moments and two different situations: on four Monday afternoons, approximately
two hours after lunch in the fed state (FED), and on four Saturdays before skipping breakfast
in the fasted state (FAST). Figure 1 illustrates the study design.

Figure 1. Experimental design.

The CMJ and the FSKTmult tests were performed. All athletes answered the rating of
perceived exertion (RPE) at the end of the test sessions. The lactate concentration [LAC]
was measured pre- and two minutes post-FSKTmult using an Accutrend Plus lactometer
(Roche Diagnostics, Brazil Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil). To avoid performing the tests in a
state of hypoglycemia and to verify whether the athletes were in the FED or FAST state,
we measured the values of both pre- and post-test blood glucose [BG] concurrently with
lactate [LAC] using a FreeStyle Optium Neo glucometer (Abbott Laboratórios do Brasil
Ltda., Rio de Janeiro, Brazil).

Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 13    Figure 1. Experimental design. During the six weeks, the athletes’ food intake was recorded weekly over three non-consecutive days [19], followed by a supplementary dietary recall [20], to measure the total calories ingested and the macronutrient composition. Prior to the beginning of the study, the volunteers received explanations and training to record their food intake using homemade measures and photographic records. The supplementary dietary recall was performed based on the weekly food intake record to identify possible errors in the pro-cess carried out by the volunteers, such as food and meal identifications, homemade meas-urements, and timing. Each week, the dietary profile of each volunteer was determined using the supplementary dietary recall, which was adopted to monitor and compare the nutritional intake between the weeks of the experimental intervention. The dietary profile was determined based on the daily total caloric intake and the intake of macronutrients: carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins. All values were normalized by TBM. These proce-dures were performed using the DietBox app (Dietbox Informática Ltda., version 7.8.1, Porto Alegre, Brazil) and the following tables, in order of preference: the Brazilian Table of Food Composition (TACO), the Nutritional Composition Table of Foods Consumed in Brazil (IBGE), and the Sonia Tucunduva Philippi Table. 2.3. Familiarization and Reliability The athletes participated in two familiarization sessions in the first week and two reliability sessions in the second week, respecting a 48 h interval. In each session, we ap-plied a sequence of two sets of eight CMJs with a one-minute interval between jumps and 10 min between the sets. If in a single session, the first and second sets presented a statis-tically significant difference, then an addition set with eight CMJs was performed until two consecutive sets showed no statistically significant difference [21]. Familiarization was considered successful when there was no statistically significant difference between Nutrients 2023, 15, 3131

4 of 12

The training frequency of the athletes reached six sessions per week throughout
the six weeks. Five sessions were performed from Monday to Friday in the afternoon
(2:00 p.m.), with a 24 h interval between sessions. The sixth training session took place on a
Saturday morning (8:00 a.m.), with a 14 h interval from the Friday training session.

The IF protocol applied over the four-week intervention consisted of 12 h of time-
restricted feeding, starting at night, with breakfast omission, interspersed with periods
of non-restricted feeding. The volunteers were instructed to maintain their eating habits
during the feeding period, and no nutrition intervention was performed. On days of testing
in the fed state, the pre-workout meal was consumed between 1 to 2 h before the start of
the tests.

During the six weeks, the athletes’ food intake was recorded weekly over three non-
consecutive days [19], followed by a supplementary dietary recall [20], to measure the
total calories ingested and the macronutrient composition. Prior to the beginning of
the study, the volunteers received explanations and training to record their food intake
using homemade measures and photographic records. The supplementary dietary recall
was performed based on the weekly food intake record to identify possible errors in the
process carried out by the volunteers, such as food and meal identiﬁcations, homemade
measurements, and timing. Each week, the dietary proﬁle of each volunteer was determined
using the supplementary dietary recall, which was adopted to monitor and compare the
nutritional intake between the weeks of the experimental intervention. The dietary proﬁle
was determined based on the daily total caloric intake and the intake of macronutrients:
carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins. All values were normalized by TBM. These procedures
were performed using the DietBox app (Dietbox Informática Ltda., version 7.8.1, Porto
Alegre, Brazil) and the following tables, in order of preference: the Brazilian Table of Food
Composition (TACO), the Nutritional Composition Table of Foods Consumed in Brazil
(IBGE), and the Sonia Tucunduva Philippi Table.

2.3. Familiarization and Reliability

The athletes participated in two familiarization sessions in the ﬁrst week and two
reliability sessions in the second week, respecting a 48 h interval. In each session, we
applied a sequence of two sets of eight CMJs with a one-minute interval between jumps
and 10 min between the sets. If in a single session, the ﬁrst and second sets presented a
statistically signiﬁcant difference, then an addition set with eight CMJs was performed until
two consecutive sets showed no statistically signiﬁcant difference [21]. Familiarization was
considered successful when there was no statistically signiﬁcant difference between the
means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using
PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy).

The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed
three rounds of ﬁve sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-
minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simulacare,
São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum number
of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar
H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and
maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the
RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks
(TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick
decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and
Franchini [22].

KDI =

(cid:20)

1 −

FSKT1 + FSKT2 + FSKT3 + FSKT 4 + FSKT5
best FSKT × number of sets

(cid:21)

× 100

(1)

2.4. Performance Protocols

The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED
(Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of ﬁve jumps with a one-

Nutrients 2023, 15, 3131

5 of 12

minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed
following the same familiarization procedures.

The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training
session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from
the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to
have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL
were applied.

2.5. Total Body Mass Measures

The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital
scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To prevent
potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body
ﬂuids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least
30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise
within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session.

2.6. Statistical Analysis

The normality and sphericity of the data were veriﬁed using the Shapiro–Wilk and
Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-
parametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization
of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed
through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was veriﬁed by a two-way mixed in-
traclass correlation coefﬁcient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures
was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of
macronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to com-
pare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and
[LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated
measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify
where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was veriﬁed based
on the partial ETA ( p2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d
= 0.20 or p2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or p2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or p2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All
data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% conﬁdence interval (CI95%). All
analyses considered a signiﬁcance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed
on SPSS version 20.0.

3. Results
3.1. Familiarization and Reliability

The ﬁrst (T(8) = 0.471, p = 0.689, d = 0.03: set 1 = 30.61 ± 3.65 cm, set 2 = 29.75 ± 7.13 cm)
and second familiarization sessions (T(8) = 0.940, p = 0.378, d = 0.08: set 1 = 30.95 ± 8.32 cm,
set 2 = 28.70 ± 5.66 cm) had similar CMJ height, with a small effect. Likewise, no difference
was found in the CMJ height between the ﬁrst and second sessions (T(8) = 0.214, p = 0.833,
d = 0.01, session 1 = 30.18 ± 5.49 cm, session 2 = 29.82 ± 6.97 cm), and the effect size was
also considered small. The FSKTmult test indicated no statistically signiﬁcant difference
for the total mean of kicks in the ﬁrst familiarization session (92.44 ± 8.79) (T(8) = −0.595;
p = 0.569; d = 0.02) regarding the second session (93.33 ± 6.87).

The reliability test for the CMJ found a signiﬁcant and excellent correlation
(ICC = 0.97; p = 0.001; CI95% = 0.90–0.99) between the jumps of the ﬁrst (37.47 ± 5.93 cm)
and second sessions (37.20 ± 6.48 cm). The FSKTmult indicated a signiﬁcant correlation to
the mean number of total kicks in the ﬁrst session (89.00 ± 8.2), ranked as good (ICC = 0.89;
p = 0.001; CI95% = 0.57–0.97) compared with the mean number of total kicks in the second
session (91.11 ± 6.67).

Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, 3131

6 of 12

3.2. Total Body Mass

The TBM decreased with a large effect size throughout the weeks (F(4) = 7.120;
p = 0.006; p2 = 0.47). The BonFerroni’s test detected reductions in the ﬁrst with a small
effect size (62.200 ± 6.567 kg; p = 0.001; 95%CI = 0.60, 2.16; Cohen’s d = −0.05) and second
weeks (62.389 ± 6.833 kg; p = 0.022; 95%CI = 0.15, 2.23; Cohen’s d = −0.04) of fasting
compared with the pre-intervention (63.584 ± 6.576 kg); however, it was later stabilized
and kept unchanged in the third (62.422 ± 6.128 kg) and fourth weeks (63.369 ± 6.204 kg)
(Figure 2).

Figure 2. Total body mass variation. Pre: pre-intervention; W1: week 1; W2: week 2; W3: week 3;
W4: week 4; * statistically signiﬁcant difference in relation to the pre-intervention.

3.3. CMJ

No difference was indicated regarding the CMJ either between the intervention weeks
(F(3) = 1.232; p = 0.320; p2 = 0.13) or between situations (F(2) = 0.994; p = 0.392; p2 = 0.11).
However, there was a difference in the week x situation interaction, with a large effect size
(F(6) = 7.040; p = 0.001; p2 = 0.46). The BonFerroni posthoc test detected a difference in the
FED compared with the BL (p = 0.049; 95%CI = 0.01–3.33) concerning the FAST (p = 0.003;
95%CI = −3.33, −0.87) in the ﬁrst week; however, no difference was found in the second
week. In the third week, the BonFerroni posthoc test detected a difference between the FED
and FAST (p = 0.047; 95%CI = 0.03, 4.52), whereas in the fourth week, a difference between
the situations was found. Furthermore, the CMJ for the FED in the third week was higher
than that in the ﬁrst week (p = 0.032; 95%CI = −5.72, −0.24), which also occurred for the
fourth week compared with the ﬁrst week (p = 0.050; 95%CI = −5.37, 0.01). Table 1 shows
the respective results.

3.4. FSKTmult

The results of the FSKTmult test indicated no difference in the MK or the TNK be-
tween the weeks (F(3) = 3.744; p = 0.074; p2 = 0.31), between the situations (F(2) = 2.610;
p = 0.134; p2 = 0.24), or in the week x situation interaction (F(6) = 2.068; p = 0.140; p2
= 0.20) (Table 2). Compared with the BL, the results of RPE showed signiﬁcantly higher
values (p = 0.020) in the FAST for the second week, the FAST and FED for the third week,
and the FAST and FED for the fourth week. Additionally, the RPE in the fourth week
was higher than the BL (p = 0.001), as well as in the second (p = 0.033) and third weeks
(p = 0.010), with a large effect size ( p2 = 0.65). Regarding the mean KDI, no differ-
ence occurred between the weeks (F(3) = 1.366; p = 0.277; p2 =0.14), between situations

Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 13   3. Results 3.1. Familiarization and Reliability The first (T(8) = 0.471, p = 0.689, d = 0.03: set 1 = 30.61 ± 3.65 cm, set 2 = 29.75 ± 7.13 cm) and second familiarization sessions (T(8) = 0.940, p = 0.378, d = 0.08: set 1 = 30.95 ± 8.32 cm, set 2 = 28.70 ± 5.66 cm) had similar CMJ height, with a small effect. Likewise, no dif-ference was found in the CMJ height between the first and second sessions (T(8) = 0.214, p = 0.833, d = 0.01, session 1 = 30.18 ± 5.49 cm, session 2 = 29.82 ± 6.97 cm), and the effect size was also considered small. The FSKTmult test indicated no statistically significant difference for the total mean of kicks in the first familiarization session (92.44 ± 8.79) (T(8) = −0.595; p = 0.569; d = 0.02) regarding the second session (93.33 ± 6.87). The reliability test for the CMJ found a significant and excellent correlation (ICC = 0.97; p = 0.001; CI95% = 0.90–0.99) between the jumps of the first (37.47 ± 5.93 cm) and second sessions (37.20 ± 6.48 cm). The FSKTmult indicated a significant correlation to the mean number of total kicks in the first session (89.00 ± 8.2), ranked as good (ICC = 0.89; p = 0.001; CI95% = 0.57–0.97) compared with the mean number of total kicks in the second session (91.11 ± 6.67). 3.2. Total Body Mass The TBM decreased with a large effect size throughout the weeks (F(4) = 7.120; p = 0.006; ŋp2 = 0.47). The BonFerroni’s test detected reductions in the first with a small effect size (62.200 ± 6.567 kg; p = 0.001; 95%CI = 0.60, 2.16; Cohen’s d = −0.05) and second weeks (62.389 ± 6.833 kg; p = 0.022; 95%CI = 0.15, 2.23; Cohen’s d = −0.04) of fasting compared with the pre-intervention (63.584 ± 6.576 kg); however, it was later stabilized and kept unchanged in the third (62.422 ± 6.128 kg) and fourth weeks (63.369 ± 6.204 kg) (Figure 2).  Figure 2. Total body mass variation. Pre: pre-intervention; W1: week 1; W2: week 2; W3: week 3; W4: week 4; * statistically significant difference in relation to the pre-intervention. 3.3. CMJ No difference was indicated regarding the CMJ either between the intervention weeks (F(3) = 1.232; p = 0.320; ŋp2 = 0.13) or between situations (F(2) = 0.994; p = 0.392; ŋp2 = 0.11). However, there was a difference in the week x situation interaction, with a large effect size (F(6) = 7.040; p = 0.001; ŋp2 = 0.46). The BonFerroni posthoc test detected a dif-ference in the FED compared with the BL (p = 0.049; 95%CI = 0.01–3.33) concerning the FAST (p = 0.003; 95%CI = −3.33, −0.87) in the first week; however, no difference was found in the second week. In the third week, the BonFerroni posthoc test detected a difference Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, 3131

7 of 12

(F(2) = 0.036; p = 0.965; p2 = 0.01), or in the week x situation interaction (F(6) = 1.550;
p = 0.182; p2 = 0.16). Table 1 shows the respective results.

Table 1. Performance in CMJ and FSKT.

Variable

Situation

W1

W2

W3

W4

CMJ(cm)

MK

TNK

RPE

KDI

BL
FAST
FED

BL
FAST
FED

BL
FAST
FED

BL
FAST
FED

BL
FAST
FED

36.93 ± 6.22

37.36 ± 6.77
35.26 ± 7.15 *,&

36.47 ± 5.78
37.54 ± 5.79

35.96 ± 5.05
38.24 ± 6.45 &,$

36.91 ± 6.12
37.95 ± 5.61 $

18.17 ± 1.16
18.23 ± 1.16

18.36 ± 1.17
18.74 ± 0.84

18.60 ± 0.97
18.94 ± 1.03

18.80 ± 1.23
19.04 ± 0.97

18.28 ± 0.98

274.22 ± 14.82

272.56 ± 15.39
273. 56 ± 17.40

275.44 ± 17.59
281.11 ± 12.71

279.11 ± 14.66
284.11 ± 15.54

282.11 ± 18.52
285.67 ± 14.58

9.33 ± 0.50
9.56 ± 0.52

9.89 ± 0.33 *
9.56 ± 0.52

9.89 ± 0.33 *
9.89 ± 0.33 *

10.00 ± 0.00 *,#
10.00 ± 0.00 *,#

9.22 ± 0.44

9.27 ± 3.01
9.95 ± 2.64

9.27 ± 3.01
9.95 ± 2.64

9.27 ± 3.01
9.95 ± 2.64

9.27 ± 3.01
9.95 ± 2.64

8.90 ± 2.91

BL: baseline; FAST: fasting state; FED: fed state; MK: mean of kicks of the three rounds of frequency speed of kick
test multiple series; TNK: total number of kicks performed in the three rounds of frequency speed of kick tests
multiple series. KDI: mean of the fatigue index in the three rounds of frequency speed of kick test multiple series;
W1: week 1; W2: week 2; W3: week 3; W4: week 4. * statistically signiﬁcant difference from baseline; & statistically
signiﬁcant difference in relation the fasting state; $ statistical difference of week compared to week 1; # statistically
signiﬁcant difference in comparison to the other weeks.

Table 2. Physiological FSKT variables.

Variable

Situation

W1

W2

W3

W4

HR mean(bpm)

HR max(bpm)

[BG]pre(mg/dL)

[BG]post(mg/dL)

BL
FAST
FED

BL
FAST
FED

BL
FAST
FED

BL
FAST
FED

176.00 ± 6.87
176.33 ± 9.00

171.22 ± 12.86
171.78 ± 13.67

169.89 ± 8.85
173.00 ± 8.64

173.56 ± 9.35
174.11 ± 7.75

176.22 ± 7.13

185.85 ± 6.73
185.44 ± 5.87

181.22 ± 11.75
182.78 ± 7.77

182.89 ± 7.99
183.78 ± 7.79

183.89 ± 8.10
185.44 ± 6.34

184.59 ± 4.47

85.33 ± 9.88 &

70.67 ± 9.06
81.11 ± 20.43 &

69.44 ± 10.81
85.67 ± 12.18 &

70.22 ± 7.77
91.78 ± 14.64 &

69.00 ± 9.68
97.44 ± 13.93 &

120.33 ± 13.56 *
110.56 ± 15.15 *

115.89 ± 19.21 *
110.67 ± 18.26 *

112.22 ± 13.55 *
108.00 ± 18.20 *

126.11 ± 17.58 *
116.89 ± 14.30 *

120.67 ± 17.22

Note: BL: baseline; FAST: fasting state; FED: fed state; HR mean: Heart Rate mean; HR max: Heart Rate
maximal; BGpre: Blood Glucose pre-test; BGpost: Blood Glucose post-test; [LAC]pre: lactate concentration
pre-test; [LAC]post: lactate concentration post-test; * statistical difference in relation to the pre-test moment;
& statistical difference in relation to fasting.

The results of the HRmed indicated no difference between the weeks (F(3) = 1.911;
p = 0.155; p2 = 0.19), between the situations (F(2) = 2.051; p = 0.161; p2 = 0.20), or between
the week x situation interaction (F(6) = 1.228; p = 0.309; p2 = 0.13). The Friedman test also
did not show a difference in the HRmax between situations (p = 0.478). These results are
shown in Table 2 below.

The results of the [BG] detected a difference between the weeks (F(3) = 3.192;
p = 0.042), between the situations (F(2) = 7.376; p = 0.005) in different moments (F(1)
= 59.737; p = 0.001), and for the situation x moment interaction (F(1) = 15.702; p = 0.001),
with a large effect size ( p2 = 0.28; p2 = 0.48; p2 = 0.88; p2 = 0.65, respectively) (Table 3).
The BonFerroni posthoc test indicated that these differences occurred between the third
and fourth weeks (p = 0.021; 95%CI = −8.38. −0.68). The test also indicated that the values

Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, 3131

8 of 12

of FAST [BG] and FED (p = 0.014; 95%CI = −10.73, −1.32) were lower than in the BL
(p = 0.026; 95%CI = −16.42. −1.10); in addition, regardless of the situation or week,
there was a difference in the [BG] values according to the moment analyzed (p = 0.001;
95%CI = −46.16. −24.947). Table 2 shows the respective results.

Table 3. Caloric intake and nutritional composition of macronutrients.

Variable

Pre

W1

W2

W3

W4

p Value

E.S(

2

)

p

Classiﬁcation

Kcal

2211.09 ±
1380.30

1409.41 ± 379.08

1727.69 ± 726.49

1908.93 ± 926.95

1904.00 ± 1462.04

Kcal/kg

34.71 ± 19.36

22.83 ± 6.99

28.11 ± 11.87

31.38 ± 15.69

30.30 ± 22.11

CHO(g/kg)

PRO(g/kg)

LIP(g/kg)

4.76 ± 4.29

1.20 ± 0.52

1.04 ± 0.48

3.52 ± 1.41

1.28 ± 0.39

0.95 ± 0.38

3.86 ± 2.15

1.20 ± 0.37

1.13 ± 0.28

3.29 ± 2.14

1.32 ± 0.45

1.08 ± 0.48

3.66 ± 2.57

1.32 ± 0.93

0.97 ± 0.54

0.121

0.411

0.540

0.444

0.829

0.10

0.10

0.05

0.01

0.04

Small

Small

Small

Small

Small

Note: Kcal: total kilocalories; Kcal/kg: kilocalories per kilogram of total body mass; CHO(g/kg): carbohydrate
value relative to total body mass, grams per kilogram of body mass; PRO(g/kg): protein value relative to
total body mass, grams per kilogram of body mass; LIP(g/kg): lipid value relative to total body mass, grams
per kilogram of body mass; Pre: pre-intervention; W1: week 1; W2: week 2; W3: week 3; W4: week 4; E.S
( p2): square partial ETA effect size.

The mean [LAC] reached 3.22 ± 0.89 mM in the pre-test and 16.48 ± 2.17 mM in
the post-test for the BL situation. The ﬁrst week of intervention presented pre- and
post-test values of 2.63 ± 0.96 mM and 2.53 ± 0.57 mM and 15.91 ± 3.43 mM and
18.58 ± 2.38 mM, respectively, for the FAST and FED situations.
In the fourth week,
the pre-test values were 3.05 ± 1.13 mM and 2.57 ± 060 mM, and the post-test values were
15.25 ± 3.82 mM and 18.78 ± 2.94 mM for FAST and FED situations, respectively. There-
fore, there was a difference between the pre- and post-test values, with a large effect size
(F(1) = 611.577; p = 0.001), as well as in the situation x moment interaction (F(2) = 5.076;
p = 0.020), also with a large effect size ( p2 = 0.98; p2 = 0.38, respectively). The BonFerroni
posthoc test indicated differences between the FAST and FED (p = 0.047; 95%CI = −2.795.
−0.021) scenarios, as well as between the pre- and post-tests (p = 0.001; 95%CI = −15.35.
−12.73).

3.5. Energy Intake

The total calories ingested in the ﬁrst week were lower than the BL, whereas in the
second week, they were greater than in the ﬁrst week. The total values of calories ingested
in the third and fourth weeks were similar but increased compared with the second week.
Despite these variations, the total number of calories ingested during IF was lower than
the BL. However, no difference between the BL and the intervention weeks was found.
In addition, the relative ingested amounts of Kcal/kg, carbohydrate (CHOg/kg), lipid
(LIPg/kg), and protein (PROg/kg) also showed no difference (Table 3).

4. Discussion

This study aimed to investigate the effect of IF on TBM and performance in Taekwondo.
The hypothesis was that the 12 h fasting protocol with breakfast omission would reduce
the TBM without decreasing performance. Throughout the four weeks of IF, the results
showed a decrease in TBM in the ﬁrst two weeks, which then remained unchanged in
the subsequent weeks. The physical performance was maintained during IF and kept
unchanged after the application of the tests, either in a fasted or fed state. Therefore, the
study hypothesis was partially proven.

Corroborating these ﬁndings, Silva et al. [7] observed that a 12 h acute fast with
breakfast omission reduces the TBM of Taekwondo athletes without affecting the CMJ and
FSKT tests performance. In our study, the lower TBM in the ﬁrst two weeks corroborates
the efﬁciency of fasting in a short-term intervention, with limited weight reduction. The
athletes might not maintain the IF any longer without a negative energy balance to reduce

Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13   the means of jump heights in two consecutive sessions [21]. All sessions were performed using PLA3–1D-7KN/JBA Zb (Staniak; Warsaw, Poland, 1000 Hz with 1 N accuracy). The FSKTmult test was applied ten minutes after the CMJ test and encompassed three rounds of five sets with 10 s of stimuli, 10 s of interval rest between sets, and a one-minute interval between rounds [7]. The test was conducted using Boomboxe® (Simu-lacare, São Paulo, Brazil), and the athletes were instructed to perform the maximum num-ber of kicks possible. During the FSKTmult test, all athletes used a heart rate sensor (Polar H10, Polar Electro Brasil, Ltda., Sao Paulo, Brazil) to have both the mean (HRmed) and maximum (HRmax) heart rates measured, and at the end of the test, they answered the RPE immediately. The performance analysis involved registering the total number of kicks (TNK) and the mean of kicks performed (MK) during three rounds. Additionally, the kick decrease index (KDI) was calculated using the following equation proposed by Santos and Franchini [22]. KDI=[1− FSKT1+FSKT2+FSKT3+FSKT 4+FSKT5best FSKT × number of sets] × 100  (1) 2.4. Performance Protocols The BL was performed 48 h after the last reliability session with the athletes in FED (Figure 1). The CMJ height in BL was assessed by applying a set of five jumps with a one-minute interval rest between them. Ten minutes later, the FSKTmult test was performed following the same familiarization procedures. The test sessions in FED were conducted on Mondays, 48 h after the last training session, whereas the tests in FAST took place on Saturdays after the 14 h rest interval from the Friday training session (Figure 1). For the tests in FAST, the athletes were instructed to have their last meal of the day 12 h before. The same test sessions and procedures as the BL were applied. 2.5. Total Body Mass Measures The TBM was measured in FAST (pre-intervention) and then weekly using a digital scale (Welmy®, Santa Bárbara d’Oeste, Brazil) on Saturdays and before the tests. To pre-vent potential small, systematic, and predictable errors due to changes in the balance of body fluids, the athletes were instructed not to ingest large amounts of water, to urinate at least 30 min before, and not to consume alcoholic beverages or perform any physical exercise within 24 h other than the Taekwondo training session. 2.6. Statistical Analysis The normality and sphericity of the data were verified using the Shapiro–Wilk and Mauchly tests. If neither the normality nor the sphericity assumptions were met, non-par-ametric tests and the Greenhouse–Geisser correction were applied. The stabilization of both the CMJ and FSKTmult tests during the familiarization sessions was analyzed through the paired student t-test [21]. Reliability was verified by a two-way mixed intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) [23]. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures was applied for the TBM regarding the amount of calories ingested and the proportion of mac-ronutrients throughout the weeks. This procedure (time x situation) was used to compare the performance variables (CMJ, TNK, MK, HRmed, HRmax, RPE, and KDI). [BG] and [LAC] in different situations were analyzed through a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures (week x situation x moment). Bonferroni’s post hoc test was used to identify where differences occurred. The Cohen’s d effect size for paired samples was verified based on the partial ETA (ŋp2) square. The effect size was considered small, medium, or large if d = 0.20 or ŋp2 = 0.04, d = 0.50 or ŋp2 = 0.25, and d = 0.8 or ŋp2 = 0.64, respectively [24,25]. All data are presented as mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence interval (CI95%). All analyses considered a significance level of α = 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed on SPSS version 20.0. Nutrients 2023, 15, 3131

9 of 12

TBM. Our results show that the mean energy intake decreases initially but increases in the
ﬁnal weeks; however, such a difference is not statistically signiﬁcant.

Studies with karate athletes performing IF showed a non-signiﬁcant difference with
a small effect size reduction in TBM before (62.4 ± 7.4 kg) and after (61.9 ± 7.1 kg) the
Ramadan fast [14]. Corroborating with these results, Zarrouk et al. [10] also found no
difference in TBM between pre- (62.1 ± 7.4 kg) and post- (61.8 ± 7.1 kg) evaluation. The
authors attribute these results to changes in the diet composition, with an increase in
energy and daily water intake. However, herein, we did not observe such a change in the
eating behavior of the athletes. Such diverging results might be partially associated with
the fasting protocol adopted and Ramadan. In our study, fasting covered the periods of
overnight and sleep, when the individuals are less physically active. Therefore, fasting
might not have a sufﬁcient impact on energy reserves and hormonal modulation, neither
altering the metabolism nor changing eating behavior, as would be expected for IF [9,12,26].
Therefore, the lower TBM during fasting is acute if not associated with a negative
energy balance [8,10,14,15]. However, the same sample size with different morphological
proﬁles can have different results. Therefore, a lower TBM with a small effect size in combat
sports involving eutrophic athletes might be as important as a large effect size in sedentary
obese individuals.

The change in TBM in the ﬁrst weeks of intervention, without differences either in
energy intake or diet composition, may have resulted from the smaller amount of food
ingested in the hours before the weight measure, which was performed during the fasting
period. Consequently, there is an acute reduction in TBM due to the limited presence of food
fragments, nutritional molecules, and water associated with solutes in the gastrointestinal
tract during the digestive process [27]. Acute dehydration promoted by fasting might also
contribute to the acute reduction in TBM [27]. In addition, the muscle glycogen stores
might recover less with a lower water content in the cells [27]. However, such a lower
concentration of muscle glycogen may not be sufﬁcient to negatively inﬂuence physical
performance, considering the low demand for this substrate during the tests performed.

Furthermore, there is an average 28% compensatory response in non-active energy
expenditure due to the lower basal energy expenditure, suggesting that only 72% of the
extra calories burned in additional activities are extra calories burned that day [28]. Such a
compensation in energy expenditure might result from the lower mitochondrial activity [11],
which would justify the reduction in TBM in the ﬁrst weeks, which some athletes then
maintained and/or recovered in the last weeks. It is worth noting that our experiment
did not cover the measures of glycogen stores, basal energy expenditure, or mitochondrial
activity, thus representing a limitation for the interpretation and discussion of the results.
Herein, neither the CMJ nor the FSKT decreased with the application of the IF protocol,
either in the FED or FAST states. These results contradict other studies with judokas and
karatekas that found signiﬁcantly lower performance after the tests were applied in the
late afternoon during Ramadan [13,15,16]. Those results might be associated with changes
in the circadian rhythm due to fasting or the particularity of Ramadan fasting, which may
enlarge muscle and liver glycogen stores in the morning rather than in the afternoon [29,30].
Thus, the effect of fasting on physical performance can be inﬂuenced by the time of day
determined for fasting and the application of the tests. However, other studies applied non-
speciﬁc tests to Taekwondo and Karate athletes subjected to Ramadan fasting and found
no changes in performance, even when conducting the tests in the afternoon [10,14,17]. In
contrast, a speciﬁc taekwondo test performed at the end of the day indicated a lower TNK
during Ramadan fasting [18]. Such diverging results might indicate that not only the time
of day can inﬂuence the outcomes but also the type of test used, the metabolic demand,
and the physical capacity evaluated. Thus, further and more speciﬁc studies on this topic
should be carried out.

The lower [BG] in the pre-test measure for the FAST state indicates that the volunteers
might not have had a meal before the tests. No statistical difference was found in the
post-test [BG] between the situations. There was a tendency toward a greater increase in

Nutrients 2023, 15, 3131

10 of 12

the [BG] for the FAST state compared with the FED. Such a result indicates a potentially
greater mobilization of liver glycogen during the test in the FAST state [31]. In addition,
the post-test in the FED state also showed higher [LAC] values compared with the FAST,
indicating that the lactic anaerobic pathway was demanded and responded in different
proportions under different exercise intensities. These data can also indicate less oxidation
of substrates for the test applied in the FAST state [31].

Furthermore, the CMJ test, which has a low demand for anaerobic lactic metabolism,
might not be sensitive enough to detect performance changes resulting from fasting in
Taekwondo athletes [7,17]. Likewise, other studies have demonstrated that either for
acute fasting [7] or FED [32], the mean and total of kicks performed in the FSKT did not
change. Therefore, even with lower [BG], muscle, and liver glycogen reserves in the pre-test
through the fasting protocol, it would also be insufﬁcient to affect performance in a speciﬁc
modality task. However, the three rounds of the FSKT may have had a greater contribution
from aerobic metabolism, as shown in simulated ﬁghts [33]. However, this is possibly
the only study with a speciﬁc test for Taekwondo after a 12 h fast demonstrating a lower
performance in the TNK during IF [18]. Contrary to our study, in the aforementioned
studies [18,33], the tests were applied in the afternoon. Therefore, there is a lower chance of
conﬁrming the hypothesis that a 12 h night IF with the test applied in the morning reduces
glycogen stores. Such a scenario can have a lower impact on performance, which seems
more plausible than the hypothesis that performance can be affected by the greater aerobic
contribution throughout the three rounds of the FSKT test.

Both the HRmed and HRmax for the three FSKT rounds have very high values, as re-
ported in the literature for training sessions, simulated ﬁghts, and ofﬁcial competitions [33].
Thus, this indicates that the adaptation in the FSKT test applied in our study reproduced
the physiological demand of the modality. In addition, the mean RPE reported after each
test round was also maximum or very close to the maximum, indicating that the volunteers
performed maximal effort. The KDI did not differ according to the different situations
either. No difference in the KDI has also been indicated in studies using the FSKT to rank
the level of physical conditioning, competitive level, and/or analyze the effect of different
training protocols on performance [22,33]. Therefore, analyzing the KDI may be insufﬁcient
to infer either an improvement or worsening in the performance of athletes. Furthermore,
all the obtained results should be treated with caution due to the sample size and the
variability of ages among the participants in this study.

Further studies should perform the three FSKT rounds using an ergo spirometer
to measure the contribution of each energy system and substrate, applied at different
times of the day, in both the FAST and FED states. Additionally, it is recommended to
incorporate tools and technologies for measuring muscular and hepatic glycogen stores
to investigate the effect of intermittent fasting on athletic performance. Furthermore, the
effect of intermittent fasting in real and simulated combat situations should be evaluated in
future research.

Aware of all the limitations reported throughout the text, the results of the present
study can support athletes, coaches, and nutritionists in their practices and prescriptions,
according to the competitive calendar and individual objectives. Furthermore, in this
study, we aim to advance the scientiﬁc discussion regarding intermittent fasting protocols,
which are more closely aligned with the cultural reality of Western countries, as well as the
evaluation of physical performance measured by non-speciﬁc and speciﬁc tests. Therefore,
it seems that this intermittent fasting protocol can be an efﬁcient strategy for weight loss
in athletes over a short period of time, allowing them to ﬁt into the appropriate category
without compromising performance.

5. Conclusions

Intermittent fasting with 12 h time-restricted feeding and breakfast omission can
promote a decrease in total body mass in the ﬁrst two weeks, with stabilization in the

Nutrients 2023, 15, 3131

11 of 12

third and fourth weeks. However, this can be promoted without decreasing Taekwondo
athletes’ performance.

Author Contributions: R.A.D.d.S., L.A.S., M.A.P.d.S., M.T.d.M. and M.D.M.D. were involved in the
elaboration of experimental design. R.A.D.d.S., J.P.P.R., Y.F.P., F.d.A.D.M.J. and L.S. collected and
analyzed data. R.A.D.d.S., L.A.S., J.P.P.R., M.A.P.d.S., M.T.d.M. and M.D.M.D. wrote all topics, made
revisions to the manuscript, and read and approved the ﬁnal version. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki and approved by the Ethics Committee of the Federal University of Minas Gerais (protocol
code 2.582.067).

Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.

Data Availability Statement: All data used within this manuscript are available upon request.

Acknowledgments: We thank the support of the Pró-Reitoria de Pesquisa (PRPq) da Universidade
Federal de Minas (UFMG). All participants signed a written informed consent.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.

2.

3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Andreato, L.V.; Andreato, T.V.; Santos, J.F.S.; Esteves, J.V.D.C.; Moares, S.M.F.; Franchini, E. Weight loss in mixed martial arts
athletes. J. Combat Sport. Martial Arts 2014, 5, 125–131. [CrossRef]
Artioli, G.G.; Saunders, B.; Iglesias, R.T.; Franchini, E. It is time to ban rapid weight loss from combat sports. Sport. Med. 2016,
46, 1579–1584. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Patterson, R.E.; Sears, D.D. Metabolic effects of intermittent fasting. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 2017, 37, 371–393. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Janiszewska, K.; Przybylowicz, K. Pre-competition weight loss among polish Taekwondo competitors–occurrence, methods and
health consequences. Arch. Budo 2015, 11, 41–45.
Santos, J.F.S.; Takito, M.Y.; Artioli, G.G.; Franchini, E. Weight loss practices in Taekwondo athletes of different competitive levels.
J. Exerc. Rehabil. 2016, 12, 202–208. [CrossRef]
LeCheminant, J.D.; Christenson, E.D.; Bailey, B.W.; Tucker, L.A. Restricting night-time eating reduces daily energy intake in health
young men: A short-term cross-over study. Br. J. Nutr. 2013, 110, 2108–2113. [CrossRef]
Silva, R.A.D.; Szmuchrowski, L.A.; Simonini, P.; Flôr, C.A.G.; Silva, B.V.; Drummond, M.D.M. Effect of 12 hour-fasting promoted
by breakfast omission on acute weight loss and physical performance of Taekwondo athletes. Arch. Budo Sci. Martial Arts Ext.
Sport. 2020, 16, 29–35.
Slater, T.; Mode, W.J.; Pinkney, M.G.; Hough, J.; James, R.M.; Sale, C. Fasting before evening exercise reduces net energy intake
and increases fat oxidation, but impairs performance in healthy males and females. Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 2022, 33, 11–22.
[CrossRef]
Trabelsi, K.; Stannard, S.R.; Chtourou, H.; Moalla, W.; Ghozzi, H.; Jamoussi, K.; Hakim, A. Monitoring athletes’ hydration status
and sleep patterns during Ramadan observance: Methodological and practical considerations. Biol. Rhythm Res. 2017, 49, 337–365.
[CrossRef]

10. Zarrouk, N.; Hug, F.; Hammouda, O.; Rebai, H.; Tabka, Z.; Dogui, M.; Bouhlel, E. Effect of Ramadan intermittent fasting on body

composition and neuromuscular performance in young athletes: A pilot study. Biol. Rhythm Res. 2013, 44, 697–709. [CrossRef]

11. Pérez-Rodriguez, M.; Huertas, J.R.; Villalba, J.M.; Casuso, R.A. Mitochondrial adaptations to calorie restriction and bariatric

surgery in human skeletal muscle: A systematic review with meta-analysis. Metabolism 2023, 138, 155336. [CrossRef]

12. Naharudin, M.N.B.; Yusof, A.; Shaw, H.; Stockton, M.; Clayton, D.J.; James, L.J. Breakfast omission reduces subsequent resistance

exercise performance. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2019, 33, 1766–1772. [CrossRef]

13. Aloui, A.; Chtourou, H.; Masmoudi, L.; Chaouachi, A.; Chamari, K.; Soussi, N. Effects of Ramadan fasting on male judokas

performances in speciﬁc and non-speciﬁc judo tasks. Biol. Rhythm Res. 2013, 44, 645–654. [CrossRef]

14. Bouhlel, H.; Latiri, I.; Zarrouk, N.; Bigard, X.; Shephard, R.; Tabka, Z.; Bouhlel, E. Effect of Ramadan observance and maximal

exercise on simple and choice reaction times in trained men. Sci. Sport. 2014, 29, 131–137. [CrossRef]

15. Chaouachi, A.; Coutts, A.J.; Chamari, K.; Wong, D.P.; Chaouachi, M.; Chtara, M.; Roky, R.; Amri, M. Effect of Ramadan intermittent
fasting on aerobic and anaerobic performance and perception of fatigue in male elite judo athletes. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2009,
23, 2702–2709. [CrossRef]
Issaoui, M.; Zouhal, H.; Yousﬁ, N.; Salhi, A.; Ali, A.; Bragazzi, N.; Hamdouni, H.; Miarka, B.; Hackney, A.C.; Abderrahman, A.B.
Effect Ramadan fasting: Association with time of day on time-motion, technical aspect and psychological responses to simulated
karate competition in young amateur competitors. Int. J. Sport. Sci. Coach. 2020, 15, 195–203. [CrossRef]

16.

Nutrients 2023, 15, 3131

12 of 12

17. Memari, A.H.; Kordi, R.; Panahi, N.; Nikookar, L.R.; Abdollahi, M.; Arkbanejad, A. Effect of Ramadan fasting in body composition

and physical performance in female athletes. Asian J. Sport. Med. 2011, 2, 61–166. [CrossRef]

18. Pak, I.E.; Cug, M.; Volpe, S.L.; Beaven, C.M. The effect of carbohydrate and caffeine mouth rising on kicking performance in

competitive Taekwondo athletes during Ramadan. J. Sport. Sci. 2020, 38, 795–800. [CrossRef]

19. Capling, L.; Beck, K.L.; Gifford, J.A.; Slater, G.; Flood, V.M.; O’connor, H. Validity of dietary assessment in athletes: A systematic

review. Nutrients 2017, 9, 1313. [CrossRef]

20. Lo, F.P.W.; Sun, Y.; Qiu, J.; Lo, B. Image-based food classiﬁcation and volume estimation for dietary assessment: A review. IEEE J.

Biomed. Health Inform. 2020, 24, 1926–1939. [CrossRef]

21. Claudino, J.G.; Mezêncio, B.; Soncin, R.; Ferreira, J.C.; Couto, B.P.; Szmuchrowski, L.A. Pre Vertical Jump Performance to Regulate

22.

the Training Volume. Int. J. Sport. Med. 2012, 33, 101–107. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Santos, J.F.S.; Franchini, E. Frequency speed of kick test performance comparison between female Taekwondo athletes of different
competitive levels. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2018, 32, 2934–2938. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

23. Weir, J.P. Quantifying test-retest reliability using the intraclass correlation coefﬁcient and the SEM. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2005,

19, 231–240. [PubMed]
Ferguson, C.J. An effect size primer: A guide for clinicians and researchers. Prof. Psych. Res. Pract. 2009, 40, 532–538. [CrossRef]
24.
25. Lakens, D. Calculating and reporting effect sizes to facilitate cumulative science: A practical primer for t-tests and ANOVAs.

Front. Psych. 2013, 4, 863. [CrossRef]

26. Nakamura, Y.; Walker, B.R.; Ikuta, T. Systematic review and meta-analysis reveals acutely elevated plasma cortisol following

fasting but not less severe calorie restriction. Stress 2016, 19, 151–157. [CrossRef]

27. Burke, L.M.; Slater, G.J.; Matthews, J.J.; Langan-Evans, C.; Horswill, C.A. ACSM Expert Consensus Statement on Weight Loss in

Weight-Category Sports. Curr. Sport. Med. Rep. 2021, 20, 199–217. [CrossRef]

28. Careau, V.; Halsey, L.G.; Pontzer, H.; Ainslie, P.N.; Andersen, L.F.; Anderson, L.J.; Arab, L.; Baddou, I.; Bedu-Addo, K.; Blaak, E.E.;

et al. Energy compensation and adiposity in humans. Curr. Biol. 2021, 31, 4659–4666. [CrossRef]

29. Queiroz, J.N.; Macedo, R.C.O.; Tinsley, G.M.; Reischak-Oliveira, A. Time-restricted eating and circadian rhythms: The biological

clock is ticking. Food Sci. Nutr. 2020, 61, 2863–2875. [CrossRef]
Shephard, R.J. Ramadan and sports: Minimizing effects upon the observant athlete. Sport. Med. 2013, 43, 1217–1241. [CrossRef]

30.
31. Hargreaves, M.; Spriet, L.L. Skeletal muscle energy metabolism during exercise. Nat. Metab. 2020, 2, 817–828. [CrossRef]
32. Naderi, A.; Samanipour, M.H.; Sarshin, A.; Forbes, S.C.; Koozehchian, M.S.; Franchini, E.; Reale, R.; Berjisian, E.; Oliveira,
E.P.; Miraftabi, H.; et al. Effects of two different doses of carbohydrate ingestion on Taekwondo-related performance during a
simulated tournament. J. Int. Soc. Sport. Nutr. 2021, 18, 40. [CrossRef]
Santos, J.F.S.; Wilson, V.D.; Herrera-Valenzuela, T.; Machado, F.S.M. Time-motion analysis and physiological responses to
Taekwondo combat on juvenile and adult athletes: A systematic review. Strength Cond. J. 2020, 42, 103–121. [CrossRef]

33.

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
