---
pmid: 37989900
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/37989900
title: Coaches' Perceptions of Common Planning Concepts Within Training Theory - An International Survey.
---

Anyadike‑Danes et al. Sports Medicine - Open           (2023) 9:109  
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40798‑023‑00657‑6

Sports Medicine - Open

ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Coaches’ Perceptions of Common 
Planning Concepts Within Training Theory: 
An International Survey
 , Lars Donath1 and John Kiely2 
Kechi Anyadike‑Danes1* 

Abstract 
Background  The planning of training is a popular yet controversial topic among coaches and sports scientists. Perio‑
disation is often presented in the literature as the most efficacious approach to planning training. While historically 
surveys of coaches appeared to support this a key failing was that no unified definition of periodisation exists. Recent 
surveys offering a periodisation definition and an alternative planning methodology found many choosing the alter‑
native therefore questioning periodisation’s wide acceptance. The current survey looked to explore how coaches 
perceived specific concepts, drawn from the literature, that relate to the planning of training.

Methods  106 coaches [age range: 18–65+ years, 31% 15+ years coaching, 58% individual‑events/sports and 32% 
international level] from across the world completed a novel cross‑sectional online survey on the planning of train‑
ing and the training process. Topics included use of periodisation, division of time into discrete periods, assignment 
of goals and training to pre‑determined periods and the adaptability of pre‑established plans.

Results  The majority described their planning approach as training periodisation (71%). Similarly, there was strong 
agreement with the necessity to determining a goal for the season (85%) and divide the season into distinct manage‑
able periods of time (73%). When examining whether physical adaptations are achievable within specific and fixed 
timeframes only a minority (33%) agreed, a similar result was found for training physical capacities in a sequential 
order (37%). Finally, there was limited support for training targets remaining fixed over a training period (10%).

Conclusions  As a tool for the planning of athlete’s training, periodisation is often presented as the best and most 
popular approach. Recent research however has highlighted possible discrepancies in its usage among practitioners. 
The results of this survey echo this and question the acceptance of periodisation concepts even among periodisation 
users. In part this may be due to key tenets of periodisation no longer being supported by research or practice. A lin‑
gering question then is whether the beliefs of coaches, developed through experience and supported by research, 
will continue to be marginalized. If sports scientists wish to aid coaches then they need to be engaged in future 
research initiatives as co‑collaborators.

Key points 

•  Many coaches, even self‑described periodisation users, did not employ key periodisation concepts such as train‑

ing specific fitness factors in a sequential order.

*Correspondence:
Kechi Anyadike‑Danes
kechi.anyadike‑danes@stud.dshs‑koeln.de
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

© The Author(s) 2023. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which 
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the 
original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or 
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory 
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this 
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

Anyadike‑Danes et al. Sports Medicine - Open           (2023) 9:109 

Page 2 of 12

•  Rather  than  periodisation,  many  coaches’  practices  seemed  to  align  with  what  could  be  considered  planning 

best practice, based on the levels of uncertainty in the training process.

•  Given the lack of periodisation alternatives in the literature, and the results of this study, future research should 

explore how non‑periodisation coaches formulate, manage and deliver training plans.

Keywords  Periodization, Resistance training, Inter‑individual response, Coaches’ perceptions

Background
The idea of planning training for increased performance 
is  a  popular  though  controversial  topic  that  has  a  long 
history  with  many  different  approaches  having  been 
documented [1]. The approach frequently featured in the 
scientific  literature  is  periodisation.  Indeed  a  recent  lit-
erature review stated that a “periodized training process 
is  considered  the  principal  planning  strategy  for  athlete 
development and preparation by most coaches and sport 
scientists.” [1].

The term periodisation as it relates to athlete prepara-
tion  and  the  planning  of  training  can  be  traced  back  to 
1960’s USSR where it was coined by sports scientist Lev 
Matveev [2]. While the planning of athletes training was 
nothing  new  Matveev  was  posed  the  question  of  “How 
to  peak  at  the  right  time?”.  A  perceived  problem  for  the 
USSR  was  the  inability  to  guarantee  that  their  athletes 
would  experience  their  best  performance  when  needed. 
Based  upon  his  research  findings  and  the  incorporation 
of  then  contemporary  research  he  proposed  periodisa-
tion,  an  approach  based  on  science  that  would  ensure 
an  athlete  experienced  their  peak  performance  when 
planned [2].

It is important to note however that objections existed 
from  the  start  to  periodisation’s  superiority  and  wide 
applicability  [2].  Due  to  its  original  conception  being 
for  sports  with  short  seasons  and  few  peaks  it  was  not 
deemed  universally  applicable,  with  team  sports  noting 
specific  problems  [2].  Within  scientific  literature  things 
are  complicated  by  the  lack  of  a  unified  definition  for 
periodisation  with  one  review  finding  at  least  80  in  the 
literature  [3].  Recently  it  was  described  as  “the  macro-
management of the training process with respect to time. 
In  other  words,  time  is  allocated  toward  various  fitness 
phases that are strategically aligned in a unilateral fashion 
toward competition.”[4]. Through this lens periodisation 
is  an  exercise  in  planning  and  management,  in-particu-
lar  macro-management.  In  contrast  programming  (the 
micro-management)  deals  with  training  specifics  (e.g., 
exercise  selection)  [4].  Using  definitions  in  the  peer-
reviewed  literature  Kataoka  et  al.  proposed  that  “perio-
dization  divides  the  training  plan  into  discrete  cycles, 
phases, or blocks that focus on developing specific physi-
ological  adaptations  (i.e.,  muscle  hypertrophy,  strength, 

power, speed, aerobic endurance, and others). Over time, 
the training program will typically progress from general 
to specific adaptations with the intention of bringing peak 
performance  at  competition  time”  [3].  These  definitions 
highlight  the  training  process  being  broken  into  smaller 
periods  which  are  sequenced  in  a  predetermined  order, 
each period lays the foundation for the next in a “mutu-
ally dependent” nature [1, 5]. Furthermore, in periodisa-
tion  “once  planned,  fitness  phases  and  other  respective 
timelines  are  largely  static”,  though  specific  training 
parameters may vary [4].

Previously  a  review  of  surveys  examining  different 
practices  among  strength  and  conditioning  coaches 
(SCC) seemed to support periodisation’s dominance with 
89%  indicating  they  used  it  [6].  Indeed,  one  such  sur-
vey of SCC working in professional soccer reported that 
98%  used  periodisation  [7].  However,  a  recent  survey  of 
SCC working in elite Brazilian soccer found that only 6% 
indicated that they used periodization [8]. This stands in 
contrast  to  both  the  results  of  the  review  and  the  prior 
survey  of  SCC  in  professional  soccer  [7].  A  possible 
reason  for  this  divergence  is  that  earlier  surveys  simply 
asked  coaches  whether  they  used  periodisation,  a  prob-
lem considering the lack of consensus for a definition. In 
contrast the survey of Brazilian coaches gave descriptors 
for two different planning approaches [8]. The first gave a 
description  of  periodisation  highlighting  pre-planned  or 
fixed routines with players peaking for matches deemed 
most  important  (6%).  The  second  descriptor  detailed 
programs  that  were  frequently  readjusted  according  to 
physical  and  physiological  responses  with  the  purpose 
being  to  maintain  high  levels  of  performance  (94%)  [8]. 
While similar findings were also found among Argentin-
ian  rugby  SCC  an  obvious  question  might  be  whether 
such  an  outlook  is  restricted  to  team  sports  given  that 
periodisation was designed for individual sports such as 
track and field [9]. However, a survey of Brazilian sprint 
and  jump  coaches  reported  fewer  chose  periodisation 
over the ‘flexible’ alternative (31.6% vs 52.6%) [10]. These 
surveys highlight the issue of not providing a formal peri-
odisation definition and suggest that key aspects of peri-
odisation might not be seen as useful among all coaches.

As a tool periodisation is actively promoted not just in 
the peer-reviewed literature but also within the education 

Anyadike‑Danes et al. Sports Medicine - Open           (2023) 9:109 

Page 3 of 12

space.  An  examination  of  the  course  description  for  a 
range of organizations offering SCC certifications shows 
that  they  all  have  time  spent  teaching  periodisation  [5, 
11–14].  Furthermore,  university  degrees  that  offer  cross 
accreditations  for  its  students  with  these  organizations 
need  to  cover  periodisation.  This  is  merely  mentioned 
to  highlight  the  pervasive  nature  with  which  periodisa-
tion  seems  to  be  taught,  at  least  in  an  English-speaking 
context.  However,  while  periodisation  might  sometimes 
be  seen  as  synonymous  with  planning,  it  is  in  fact  only 
but  one  approach  as  highlighted  by  the  survey  results 
and elsewhere in the literature [8–10, 15]. Due to a lack 
of  research,  it  is  also  not  clear  whether  national  and/or 
sporting  culture  affects  opinions  on  planning  including 
periodisation  usage.  For  example,  the  two  surveys  with 
low periodisation usage were performed in South Amer-
ica. Further as a possible reason for the lack of periodisa-
tion use they highlighted the “congested and demanding 
training  and  competitive  schedules  faced  by  team-sport 
athletes”  along  with  high  levels  of  performance  needed 
most of the year [8, 9].

Therefore, though most surveys suggest that periodisa-
tion  is  the  preeminent  planning  methodology  there  are 
potential caveats, specifically concerning the definition of 
periodisation given and the inclusion of a viable alterna-
tive. An alternative approach then is to ask coaches spe-
cifically about the core concepts that are reported within 
the  literature  to  underpin  periodisation  [9].  This  would 
allow for a more detailed understanding of coaches’ opin-
ions and practices as well as whether theory and practice 
are aligned.

Hence, the objective of this survey was to describe how 
coaches (sports-specific and SCC) from a range of back-
grounds  view  concepts,  drawn  from  the  literature,  that 
relate  to  the  planning  of  training.  Due  to  its  influence 
many  of  these  concepts  relate  to  periodisation  and  are 
considered fundamental to it. The surveys responses are 
then compared to the literature allowing for (1) an under-
standing  of  whether  the  meaning  of  periodisation  is  as 
varied among coaches as it is in the literature (2) among 
self-described  periodisation  users  what  concepts,  if  any, 
they use and (3) how do non-periodisation users respond 
to periodisation concepts.

Methods
Sample Selection and Administration

The  survey  utilized  a  purposive  convenient  sample  due 
to the lack of a centralized coaching database needed for 
probability sampling. Participation was voluntary and all 
those  who  took  part  were  notified  they  could  withdraw 
at any point. Due to the fundamental nature of the top-
ics explored within the survey there was a limited inclu-
sion criteria of currently working with athletes as a coach 

(sports-specific  or  SCC),  being  at  least  18  years  old  and 
English  literate.  With  no  agreed  way  to  determine  sam-
ple size for surveys we established ours based on similar 
studies leading to a minimum sample of 100 [6, 16–18]. 
The survey was available online through Microsoft Forms 
from November 2021 to February 2022. It was distributed 
through the authors social media accounts and personal 
networks.  Though  this  approach  has  limitations  (which 
will  be  discussed  later)  it  is  not  uncommon  [19–21].  At 
the  surveys  landing  page  potential  participants  could 
access  an  information  sheet  for  the  study.  Participation 
required coaches to indicate that they had read the infor-
mation sheet and gave consent.

Study Design and Survey Development

It was determined to use cross-sectional study approach. 
A review of the English literature highlighted that no cur-
rent  survey  featured  detailed  questions  on  the  specific 
topics that were of interest. Therefore, it was decided that 
a  new  survey  was  needed.  Recent  surveys  in  the  litera-
ture  as  well  as  texts  on  methodology  were  consulted  to 
aid  in  the  determination  of  best  practice  regarding  reli-
ability and validity [9, 18, 20–25]. Given the exploratory 
nature  of  the  survey  face/content  validity  were  consid-
ered  most  important.  This  was  in-turn  combined  with 
the piloting process which took place across two rounds 
with  two  separate  groups.  The  first  was  with  a  small 
group of experienced coaching practitioners qualified to 
doctoral  level  (n = 3).  The  groups  coaching  experience 
was  in  a  range  of  sports,  including  both  team  and  indi-
vidual  events,  and  at  a  variety  of  levels  simultaneously 
they were also still actively publishing within sports sci-
ence.  This  round  helped  determine  whether  the  survey 
accurately reflected the relevant literature, with feedback 
being used to improve content and clarity. A few exam-
ples of this included inclusion of questions, restructuring 
of questions and removal of questions (e.g., due to repeti-
tion, lack of precision). A second round of content analy-
sis combined with piloting was then performed focusing 
on expression of concepts and clarity. For this a separate 
group of practitioners representative of the target popu-
lation was used (n = 7). This feedback allowed for minor 
alterations and refinement. Other forms of validity such 
as concurrent, predictive and construct validity were not 
deemed  appropriate.  Regarding  reliability  as  this  survey 
was  both  exploring  what  coaches  do  and  think,  some-
thing  that  can  naturally  fluctuate  over  time,  stability 
(test–retest reliability) was not considered necessary [16]. 
Internal  reliability  and  inter-observer  consistency  were 
also not seen as appropriate.

The  final  survey  was  constructed  around  three  dis-
tinct topics that ordinarily would be covered in distinctly 
separate  surveys:  (1)  factors  driving  physical  training 

 Anyadike‑Danes et al. Sports Medicine - Open           (2023) 9:109 

Page 4 of 12

adaptation,  (2)  ‘fundamentals’  of  planning  training  and 
(3) the ability to predict training adaptations. This merg-
ing was done due to issues around recruitment and reten-
tion of participants. At the outset it was determined that 
these  separate  topics  would  be  merged  into  one  survey 
but  then  be  separated  back  out  for  analysis.  In  part  this 
was also considered necessary as it would not be possible 
to  coherently  cover  all  the  topics  in  a  single  article. The 
authors felt that these circumstances met the criteria set 
out by the APA for separating a single data set into mul-
tiple publications [26]. This article deals with the second 
topic, that of the ‘fundamentals’ of planning training.

The  questions  discussed  are  available  in  Additional 
file  2  but  are  also  given  within  each  figure  as  they  were 
presented  to  participants.  Before  being  presented  with 
questions  regarding  the  key  topics  participants  were 
asked  to  provide  demographic  information  via  nine 
questions.  The  questions  in  the  survey  were  a  mixture 
of  single-item  response  variables,  multiple  response 
variables  and  ordinal  scales.  For  the  ordinal  scales  five-
point  options  were  used  as  it  has  been  suggested  that 
this  number  maximizes  discrimination  without  sacrific-
ing  reliability  with  longer  scales  leading  to  data  quality 
reduction [27]. Before submitting the survey participants 
were  asked  if  they  were  willing  to  take  part  in  planned 
follow-up questionnaires. Ethical approval for the survey 
was obtained from the German Sport University Cologne 
ethics  committee.  Additional  information  can  be  found 
in the Checklist for Reporting Results of Internet E-Sur-
veys (CHERRIES) available in Additional file 1: Table S1 
[28].

Statistical Analyses

Due to convenient sampling only descriptive statistics (in 
the form of percentages) are presented as generalizations 
or inferences could not be made to the wider population 
[29]. Survey responses were exported to Microsoft Excel 
[30],  anonymized,  missing  data  checks  performed  and 
then  explored  in  comparison  with  the  literature.  After 
an  initial  comparison  to  the  literature  the  data  set  was 
split  based  on  those  who  identified  as  using  periodiza-
tion and those not. While it would be desirable to make 
comparisons based on other factors (e.g., experience), or 
try to determine factors of those who do and do not use 
periodization, this was deemed inappropriate. This is due 
to the fact that neither correlations nor causation can be 
established using a non-probability sample.

Results
Background Information

On  close  106  coaches  had  completed  the  survey  with  a 
further  two  accessing  but  not  granting  consent.  The 
demographic  details  of  the  participants  are  seen  in 

Table  1.  Participants  were  predominantly  male  (92%) 
with a high level of formal education (60% postgraduate). 
The  majority  (84%)  held  a  coaching  qualification.  Par-
ticipants worked with team and/or individual sports at a 
variety of levels.

Periodization Use

As indicated in Fig. 1 71% of the coaches described their 
planning approach as periodization while 61% saw a dif-
ference between periodization and planning (Fig. 2).

Planning Fundamentals

Figure  3  shows  responses  to  statements  regarding  fun-
damental  planning  concepts.  When  asked  whether  they 
evaluate  athletes  needs  at  the  beginning  of  each  season 
the overwhelming majority agreed to some extent (96%). 
A similar picture emerged regarding the setting of goals 
for each season (85%). The third statement was regarding 
the division of the season into distinct manageable peri-
ods of time which while the majority supported was less 
than  the  previous  two  (73%).  Finally,  almost  half  agreed 
(49%)  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  season  defined  and 
detailed goals should be assigned to each training period. 
However, the single largest response was neutral (36%).

Order of Training

Figure  4  shows  responses  to  statements  regarding  the 
ordering  of  training.  Many  of  the  coaches  indicated 
to  some  degree  (60%)  that  training  should  progress 
throughout  the  year  from  general  to  specific.  Regarding 
whether physical achievements were achievable within a 
specific and fixed timeframe there was greater disagree-
ment (40%) than agreement (33%). An increased number 
disagreed (47%) that each training period should primar-
ily  focus  on  a  specific  physical  capacity  though  29%  did 
agree  to  some  extent.  A  final  statement  about  the  need 
for physical capacities to be trained in a sequential order 
found more disagreeing (40%) than agreeing (37%).

Revising the Plan

In  the  final  section  coaches  were  shown  statements 
regarding the revising of the training plan with responses 
presented in Fig. 5. Over half of coaches (66%) indicated 
that completing the training plan increased the likelihood 
that an athlete would achieve their pre-determined goals. 
When asked whether training targets should remain fixed 
over a training period, 76% indicated they disagreed with 
only  11%  agreeing.  Similarly,  more  coaches  disagreed 
(64%)  that  consistently  changing  the  plan  was  a  sign  of 
poor planning. Finally, when asked about the importance 
of sticking to the plan 42% disagreed while 21% agreed.

Anyadike‑Danes et al. Sports Medicine - Open           (2023) 9:109 

Page 5 of 12

Table 1  Descriptive Characteristics of Coaches

Gender

Male
(92%)

Female
(8%)

Age

18–34
(38%)

35–54
(52%)

55–64
(8%)

65+ 
(3%)

Coaching 
qualification?

Yes
(84%)

No
(16%)

Academic qualification

Location

School leaving qualifications
(8%)

UK/Ireland
(36%)

Bachelor’s degree
(31%)

Masters degree
(49%)

Doctoral degree
(11%)

Europe (not incl. the UK or Ireland)
(23%)

North America
(23%)

Asia
(4%)

South America
(4%)

Africa
(0%)

Oceania
(11%)

Years coaching

Individual or teams sports 

Personal participation in sport

Level of athlete(s)

Team
(42%)

Individual (58%)

Yes
(92%)

No
(8%)

1–5
(20%)

6–10
(29%)

11–15
(20%)

15+ 
(31%)

Amateur/Recreational
(14%)

Regional
(25%)

National
(29%)

International
(32%)

29%

71%

39%

61%

Yes

No

Yes

No

Fig. 1  Percentage of coaches who described their approach 
as periodization (Would you describe your planning approach 
as training periodization?)

Fig. 2  Perceived difference between periodization and planning (Do 
you see a distinction between periodization and planning?)

Discussion
Within the literature there are ongoing debates over the 
utility  of  planning  approaches  like  periodization  in  part 
due to issues surrounding efficacy [31, 32]. Furthermore, 
with  a  lack  of  agreement  on  a  definition  for  periodiza-
tion  it  has  been  difficult  to  determine  its  usage  within 
coaching  communities  [3].  Therefore,  our  survey  aimed 

to describe how coaches view a variety of planning con-
cepts drawn from the literature many of which are funda-
mental to periodization. In alignment with prior surveys 
the  majority  of  the  coaches  identified  their  planning 
approach as periodization (71%). However, just over half 
(52%)  of  these  self-identified  periodization  users  saw  a 
distinction between planning and periodization. Among 
many of the coaches there was a general agreement about 

 Anyadike‑Danes et al. Sports Medicine - Open           (2023) 9:109 

Page 6 of 12

Each season I evaluate my athletes needs.

4%

A goal is determined for each season.

12%

3%

52%

44%

34%

51%

I divide the season into dis(cid:141)nct manageable
periods of (cid:141)me.

At the beginning of the season deﬁned and
detailed goals are assigned to each dis(cid:141)nct
separate period of (cid:141)me.

17%

9%

14%

15%

30%

43%

35%
36%

Fig. 3  Responses to statements regarding fundamental planning concepts

Strongly agree

Agree

Neutral

Disagree

Strongly disagree

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

Physical capaci(cid:10)es (e.g. strength, power)
should be trained in a sequen(cid:10)al order.

Each training period should primarily focus
on a speciﬁc physical capacity (for example:
maximal strength).

Physical adapta(cid:10)ons are achievable within
speciﬁc and ﬁxed (cid:10)meframes.

Over the course of a compe(cid:10)(cid:10)ve year,
training should progress from
general to
speciﬁc.

2%

9%

8%

8%

9%

8%

9%

28%

22%

32%

21%

25%

38%

25%

26%

31%

23%

21%

18%

37%

Fig. 4  Responses to statements regarding the ordering of training periods

Strongly agree

Agree

Neutral

Disagree

Strongly disagree

0%

5%

10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40%

the use of some basic planning strategies which, though 
they occur in periodization, are not unique to. An exam-
ple  being  the  determination  of  goals  for  each  season 
which the majority agreed to (85%). However, some con-
cepts considered specific to periodization, such as train-
ing  physical  capacities  in  a  specific  order,  had  limited 
agreement  (37%)  with  more  disagreeing  (40%).  Perhaps 

most  surprisingly,  is  that  out  of  four  statements  reflect-
ing  specific  periodization  concepts  only  one,  training 
proceeding from general to specific, was agreed upon by 
more  than  half  of  the  periodization  users.  While  super-
ficially  these  results  support  the  notion  that  periodiza-
tion  is  the  principal  strategy  used  by  coaches,  as  the 
adage  goes  the  devil  is  in  the  detail.  A  more  nuanced 

Anyadike‑Danes et al. Sports Medicine - Open           (2023) 9:109 

Page 7 of 12

Successfully comple(cid:8)ng the training plan
op(cid:8)mizes the likelihood of the athlete
achieving their pre-determined goals.

Over the course of a training period, training
targets should remain ﬁxed

5%

1%

3%

8%

16%

28%

50%

14%

19%

57%

It is important to s(cid:8)ck to the plan.

Consistently changing the plan is a sign of
poor planning.

37%

32%

5%

16%

10%

4%

11%

14%

21%

50%

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

Fig. 5  Responses to statements regarding the revising of the plan once started

Strongly agree

Agree

Neutral

Disagree

Strongly disagree

examination of the results highlights that though a coach 
may  say  they  use  periodization  they  in  fact  might  not 
agree with key concepts outlined in the literature. A pos-
sible reason for many indicating that they use periodiza-
tion is the lack of discrimination between it and planning 
within the bulk of the literature [15]. To best explore the 
results of this survey and for clarity’s sake the discussion 
is divided into three primary themes: (1) planning funda-
mentals, (2) order of training and (3) revising the plan.

Periodization Use

Previous  coaching  surveys  suggest  that  periodization 
is  the  principal  term  chosen  to  self-describe  the  meth-
odology  used  for  devising  athletic  training  plans  [18, 
33–38].  Our  survey  reported  similar  findings,  with  71% 
of  coaches  indicating  they  describe  their  training  plans 
as  periodized.  However,  given  the  variety  of  periodiza-
tion definitions within the literature, it is difficult to know 
whether  this  is  because  planning  and  periodization  are 
often  conflated.  When  asked  61%  of  the  coaches  agreed 
there  was  a  distinction  between  the  two  though  over 
a  third  did  not.  However,  it  is  worth  noting  that  among 
periodization users just over half (52%) saw a distinction, 
a sharp contrast to non-periodization users (84%). There 
is a possibility that due to the presentation of periodiza-
tion  as  the  principal  strategy,  and  the  ambiguity  around 
what it is, many coaches do not see a distinction. If true 
this  is  problematic  as  periodization  is  but  one  approach 
to planning. Indeed as highlighted by Afonso et al. “plan-
ning  is  the  macro-level  concept  and  periodization  is  at 

an optional level between general planning and program-
ming.” [15].

Planning Fundamentals

The  first  theme  relates  to  coaches’  views  on  the  initial 
planning process. An initial needs analysis, whereby key 
targets  for  intervention  are  identified,  is  conventionally 
recognized  as  a  key  component  of  the  planning  process 
[5,  39,  40].  In  this  survey  the  overwhelming  majority  of 
coaches agreed that athlete’s needs should be evaluated at 
the beginning of each season (96%). Similarly, the major-
ity  indicated  that  goals  should  be  determined  for  each 
season (85%).

Fundamental to periodization is the division of a larger 
timeframe  into  shorter  more  discrete  periods  which  are 
established by working backwards from the endpoint [3, 
15]. In this study 74% of coaches agreed that they divided 
the  season  into  distinct  manageable  periods  of  time. 
Given that only 71% of coaches indicated they used peri-
odization it seems that for some coaches this tactic is not 
unique to periodization. Surprisingly, and further adding 
to the confusion about what periodization is, only 83% of 
self-identified periodization users agreed with this state-
ment.  Given  periodization  is  frequently  defined  by  the 
division of time into smaller periods this begs the ques-
tion what periodization means to these coaches [41].

Finally,  coaches  were  asked  about  assigning  pre-
determined  goals  to  each  distinct  separate  period  of 
time  something  that  is  considered  core  to  periodization 
[3]. The form that these goals take may differ due to the 

 Anyadike‑Danes et al. Sports Medicine - Open           (2023) 9:109 

Page 8 of 12

approach  chosen  with  one  example  being  the  improve-
ment of specific physiological adaptations [1, 4]. Among 
these coaches less than half (49%) agreed with the state-
ment  which  is  surprising  given  the  number  of  perio-
dization  users.  In  fact  despite  the  importance  within 
periodization  of  pre-assigning  goals  to  each  period  only 
56% of periodization users agreed with the statement.

In summary, these results suggest many of the coaches 
are  simply  applying  best  practice  with  regards  to  plan-
ning. While dividing the season into distinct manageable 
periods of time is associated with periodization it is not 
the  sole  defining  characteristic.  It  is  the  pre-assigning 
of  precise  goals  to  these  periods,  which  many  disagreed 
with, that might separate periodization from other plan-
ning  approaches.  This  hints  to  the  idea  that  since  the 
needs  of  athletes  and  their  competitive  schedules  can 
evolve over time then so should their goals.

Taking  a  wider  perspective  periodization  resembles 
traditional project planning [42]. This approach is predi-
cated  on  establishing  and  accounting  for  all  influenc-
ing  factors,  with  the  belief  they  will  remain  constant 
throughout. In turn the exact time needed to accomplish 
each  sequential  objective  can  be  calculated.  While  ideal 
this is not how many projects proceed in real life due to 
unforeseen  and  unknown  factors  [43].  Similarly  due  to 
the  complex  nature  of  humans  this  is  also  not  how  we 
adapt,  rather  it  is  better  understood  through  nonlinear 
dynamics  and  the  process  of  emergence  [15,  31].  A  key 
feature being that changes in input may produce dispro-
portionate changes in output invariably leading to issues 
with predictability.

Order of Training

This  theme  explored  coaches’  views  of  core  periodiza-
tion  theory  tenets.  As  highlighted  by  Kataoka  et  al.  and 
Stone et al. periodization definitions, each period of time 
(e.g.,  phase)  should  focus  on  developing  specific  physi-
ological  adaptations  or  fitness  characteristics  [1,  3].  For 
the  coaches  in  this  study  the  concept  of  focusing  pri-
marily on a physiological capacity (as advocated in block 
periodization  for  example  [1])  was  not  overwhelmingly 
supported  (47%  disagreed).  Even  among  the  periodiza-
tion  users  there  was  limited  agreement  for  this  concept 
(36%) with a large disagreement found among non-perio-
dization users (74%). Notably, although this idea is funda-
mental to specific periodization approaches, there is little 
research supporting its efficacy either via training studies 
or underpinning theoretical work [1, 44].

An  additional,  and  fundamental,  periodization  guide-
line  is  that  physiological  capacities  should  be  developed 
in  a  specific  and  sequential  order  [1,  4].  Within  the  rel-
evant  literature,  however,  there  is  no  definitive  consen-
sus  on  how  these  specifically  focused  phases  should  be 

ordered  [1,  4].  When  presented  with  a  statement  ask-
ing  whether  physical  capacities  should  be  trained  in 
a  sequential  order,  only  38%  of  the  surveyed  coaches 
agreed (45% of periodization users). Similarly, the major-
ity  of  coaches  surveyed  by  Loturco  et  al.  and  Zabaloy 
et al. indicated that the approach they used was one that 
was constantly readjusting to better align with either the 
individual or groups responses rather than one that was 
preplanned or fixed (94% and 69%) [8, 9].

A further implicit assumption, inherent in the periodi-
zation literature, is that the timeframes necessary to real-
ize specific physical and/or performance adaptations are 
predictable [4, 15]. The need for this is highlighted in, for 
example, the Essentials of Strength Training and Condi-
tioning,  the  primary  resource  for  the  preparation  of  the 
Certified  Strength  and  Conditioning  Specialist  exam 
[45]. Within this text periodization planning is described 
as  the  process  of  partitioning  training  into  “mutually 
dependent  periods  of  time  in  order  to  induce  specific 
physiological  adaptations  that  underpin  performance 
outcomes.”[5].  Despite  this  fundamental  assumption  of 
periodization,  only  33%  of  coaches  agreed  that  physical 
adaptations are achievable within specific and fixed time 
frames. Even among periodization users, more disagreed 
(39%) than agreed (36%).

literature  and  contemporary 

This  disparity  between  the  coaches’  perspectives  and 
the periodization literature exists also between academic 
periodization 
training 
research.  In  contrast  to  periodization’s  belief  in  predict-
able  training  outcomes,  or  time  needed  to  realize  them, 
contemporary  evidence  suggests  that  athletes  adapt  to 
similar  training  interventions  at  different  rates  and  with 
different  resultant  magnitudes  [46–48].  This  extensive 
inter-individual response variability is exemplified by the 
results of Marsh et al. study where pairs of monozygotic 
twins responded differently when given the same type of 
training  [49].  The  authors  highlighted  that  this  is  likely 
due  environmental  factors  having  a  stronger  influence 
than  genetics.  Given  approaches  such  as  periodization 
require all factors to be taken into account to make accu-
rate predictions, the effect of environmental factors poses 
a serious challenge for this calculation.

In  their  synthesized  definition  Kataoka  et  al.  mention 
that  training  should  progress  from  general  to  specific 
adaptations [3]. Notably, however, the terms ‘general’ and 
‘specific’,  as  represented  in  the  literature,  remain  vague. 
For  example  one  approach  is  linked  to  that  of  the  work 
of  Matveev’s  where  the  terms  general  and  specific  were 
in  reference  to  motor  abilities  or  sport  skill  while  the 
definition given by Kataoka et al. is based on physiologi-
cal adaptations [50]. When presented with the statement 
“Over  the  course  of  a  competitive  year,  training  should 
progress from general to specific.” coaches predominantly 

Anyadike‑Danes et al. Sports Medicine - Open           (2023) 9:109 

Page 9 of 12

agreed (60%). There was, however, a notable differentia-
tion between periodization (72%) and non-periodization 
users (29%). Given the possibility for multiple interpreta-
tions of the statement research should explore what this 
concept means to coaches and how it interacts with oth-
ers such as not predetermining goals for each period.

The  results  of  this  section  suggests  that  among  these 
coaches the majority do not believe that physical training 
adaptations are achievable within specific and fixed time-
frames.  In  the  wider  literature  pre-planned  approaches 
analogous  to  periodization  are  not  recommended  given 
the levels of uncertainty involved [42]. The training pro-
cess  has  relatively  high  levels  of  uncertainty  due  to  the 
limitations  of  predictability  surrounding  how  an  athlete 
will  adapt  to  training  or  the  concomitant  timeline.  This 
is  evident  when  examining  inter  and  intra  individual 
changes  in  response  to  the  same  training  protocol  [51, 
52].  In  practice  this  means  an  athletes  response  to  the 
same training ‘block’ has varying degrees of uncertainty, a 
serious problem for approaches like periodization where 
predictability  is  crucial  [15]. This  problem  could  in  part 
explain the results found in this survey which align with 
others in the literature [8–10].

In summary, a core part of periodization is knowing the 
time required for specific adaptations an idea that can be 
traced  to  Matveev’s  research  on  peaking.  Theoretically 
this  allows  for  a  coach  to  determine  exactly  how  much 
time an athlete needs to adequately develop each attrib-
ute.  However,  if  physical  adaptations  are  not  achievable 
within these timeframes then periodization faces funda-
mental  problems.  As  implied  in  other  studies  it  appears 
that  many  of  the  coaches  surveyed  question  this  funda-
mental  tenet.  As  periodization  was  constructed  to  aid 
coaches  if  they  no  longer  find  it,  as  described  in  the  lit-
erature,  applicable  then  researchers  need  to  understand 
why and seek alternatives.

Revising the Plan

As previously noted by Cunanan et al. a hallmark of peri-
odization is that “once planned, fitness phases and other 
respective  timelines  are  largely  static”  [4].  Whether  this 
perspective  is  universally  shared  among  the  coaching 
community,  however,  remains  unclear.  Accordingly,  this 
section  explores  coaches’  perspectives  relating  to  the 
adaptability of training plans once established.

When  asked  whether  the  completion  of  the  plan 
optimized  the  likelihood  of  the  athlete  achieving  their 
goals, 66% of coaches agreed, with only 6% disagreeing. 
This  response,  as  it  aligns  with  conventional  planning 
perspectives, is perhaps unsurprising. Yet, interestingly, 
when asked whether it is important to stick to the plan 
only 21% agreed, even among periodization users more 

disagreed than agreed (37% vs 24%). These results echo 
those of three recent surveys where more coaches chose 
as their planning approach one that involved constantly 
readjusting programs rather than pre-planned periodi-
zation [8–10].

The  previous  statement  can  be  seen  as  relatively 
broad  and  general,  therefore  coaches  were  presented 
with  a  more  specific  statement  about  whether  train-
ing  targets  (within  a  specific  training  period)  should 
remain  fixed.  Interestingly  only  12%  of  periodization 
users  (10%  of  all  coaches)  agreed,  clearly  conflicting 
with  Cunanan  et  al.  assertion  that  “once  planned,  fit-
ness  phases  and  other  respective  timelines  are  largely 
static”  [4].  Following  from  the  idea  that  changing  the 
plan while acceptable is not desirable, we asked coaches 
whether  consistently  changing  the  plan  was  an  indi-
cation  of  poor  planning.  Perhaps  surprisingly  among 
those  who  use  periodization  61%  disagreed  with  only 
17%  agreeing,  this  difference  then  only  increased 
among those not using periodization (71% and 10%).

A fundamental characteristic of periodization is that 
once  planned  elements  such  as  fitness  phases  should 
not  need  to  be  changed.  This  is  predicated  on  the 
notion that training phases should take place in a pre-
determined order. The responses in this section suggest 
that  many  of  the  surveyed  coaches  do  not  agree  with 
this, instead adopting a dynamic approach aligned with 
the  recommendations  of  the  wider  literature.  Given 
the uncertainty inherent in the training process a flex-
ible  methodology  which  promotes  persistent  incre-
mental  adaptations,  based  on  feedback,  to  both  the 
goal  and  length  of  each  training  period  is  advised  [42, 
53]. Approaches analogous to this have been proposed 
in  the  training  literature,  with  extensive  theoretical 
rationales given, and have been chosen by the majority 
of  coaches  over  periodization  in  several  prior  surveys 
[8–10,  15,  54].  Despite  this,  to  date  there  seems  to  be 
little engagement with such an approach in experimen-
tal research let alone such thinking appearing as a via-
ble alternative in educational material [5].

The world that periodization was born into is funda-
mentally  different  from  todays.  Research  and  coaches 
experience  now  suggest  that  approaches  based  upon 
predicting  an  athlete’s  needs  or  the  outcome  of  future 
training is unrealistic. Rather what is required is a plan-
ning approach that can adapt to ever-changing circum-
stances  based  on  emerging  information.  Hence  those 
working  in  this  area  of  sports  science  need  to  engage 
with the coaching community to better understand how 
they have managed to navigate the pitfalls of periodiza-
tion.  Doing  so  would  allow  for  more  updated  and  rel-
evant  approaches  to  be  presented  in  the  literature  and 
teaching curricula that they influence.

 Anyadike‑Danes et al. Sports Medicine - Open           (2023) 9:109 

Page 10 of 12

Limitations

While this is possibly the first survey to examine coaches’ 
opinions on planning in such detail there are limitations 
that need to be acknowledged. As previously mentioned, 
probability  sampling  was  not  used  in  this  study  which 
carries certain limitations with it such as not being able 
to make statistical inferences. Therefore, the results from 
the  current  sample  should  not  be  generalized  to  the 
entire  coaching  population  or  specific  sub-populations 
[16,  55].  It  is  worth  noting  though  that  the  bar  is  quite 
high  for  statistical  inferences  to  be  made  [56].  Further-
more, and reflecting a widespread gender bias within per-
formance coaching, only 8% of respondents were female. 
Finally, this survey was advertised and delivered in Eng-
lish only leading it to be biased toward English speaking 
coaches. In part this led to an overrepresentation of the 
anglosphere in the demographic. While cultures effect on 
planning practices has not been established in sport cul-
tural psychology and decision making research suggest it 
is possible [57, 58]. Unfortunately, due to the underrepre-
sentation of coaches from outside of ‘Western’ cultures it 
is not possible to say whether this is the case in sport. It is 
important to note though that sampling is a problem that 
effects  not  just  this  study  but  many  especially  given  the 
strict criteria for probability sampling.

Despite  these  limitations  surveys  like  this  do  have 
strengths. For instance, this surveys novelty and explora-
tory  nature  give  insight  into  some  coaches’  perspectives 
on  important  topics  surrounding  the  planning  of  train-
ing. Similar research would allow for greater understand-
ing  of  important  topics  such  as  how  coaches  interpret 
other  topics  within  the  literature,  how  they  test  recom-
mendations  made  and  finally  how  they  may  determine 
their  utility.  Obviously  due  to  the  exploratory  nature 
of  this  current  survey  further  work  is  needed.  With  no 
surveys  discussing  these  concepts  the  questions  were 
specifically  customized  bringing  both  strengths  and 
weaknesses. While the bespoke questions provided novel 
insights, some of the questions could be strengthened by 
an increase in detail or follow up questions. These would 
be worthwhile pursuing in future research. Similarly, and 
inevitably,  despite  striving  for  clear  expression,  and  the 
use of piloting, some questions may have been misinter-
preted [55].

Recommendations for Future Research

In  this  survey  29%  of  coaches  (with  a  range  of  experi-
ence  and  coaching  levels)  self-identified  as  non-perio-
dization  users.  Nevertheless,  within  the  literature,  there 
are  few  planning  methodologies  offered  as  alternatives 
to  periodization  [59].  It  remains  unclear  how  non-peri-
odizing  coaches  formulate,  manage  and  deliver  training 
plans, therefore future descriptive research could look to 

understand this. Indeed, some who did not self-describe 
as  using  periodization  did  use  some  concepts  related 
with it, consequently a related question for these coaches 
is  what  are  the  boundaries  of  periodization.  For  those 
who self-describe as periodization users, but do not nec-
essarily  agree  with  statements  taken  from  the  theory,  it 
would be useful to explore their specific interpretation of 
the term ‘periodization’. Lastly, for these coaches it would 
be useful to explore how they use periodization theory to 
aid decision-making processes.

A  key  takeaway  from  this  survey  is  that  there  are 
coaches  who  deploy  some,  but  not  all,  periodization 
theory  directives  as  described  in  the  literature.  Further-
more,  there  seems  a  clear  disconnect  between  coaches’ 
perspectives  and  practices  and  key  periodization  pillars 
as  presented  in  the  academic  literature.  These  evident 
discrepancies  indicate  a  need  for  closer  collaboration 
between  researchers  and  practitioners.  An  alternative 
research model such as integrated knowledge translation 
might  be  of  assistance.  The  model  involves  knowledge 
users  (coaches)  having  a  meaningful  partnership  with  a 
research  team  and  being  involved  from  study  concep-
tion to application and publication [60]. This would be a 
shift from solely scientist driven research to a collabora-
tive  approach  based  on  solving  problems  via  consensus; 
thereby generating more contextually-sensitive and prag-
matic solutions [61].

Conclusion
The  existing  periodization  literature,  and  many  coach 
education  initiatives,  present  periodization  as  the  logi-
cal  and  best  planning  option  for  coaches.  Indeed  this 
perspective is echoed by one of the foremost experts on 
periodization Tudor Bompa, often referred to as a ‘father 
of  periodisation’,  when  he  stated  “we  either  have  perio-
dization  or  chaos!”  [62].  Given  periodization’s  presenta-
tion  then  as  the  primary  approach  to  planning,  in  this 
study coaches were presented with a series of statements 
based  on  ‘core  conventional  training  planning  concepts’, 
as found in the literature, and asked to respond to them. 
The results of this survey illustrate discrepancies between 
coaches’  perspectives  and  key  periodization  principles. 
This  was  evident  even  among  self-identified  periodiza-
tion users, where just over a third agreed with three fun-
damental  periodization  concepts.  Given  the  results  of 
this  survey  it  appears  many  self-described  periodization 
users  are  simply  using  modern  planning  best  practices, 
rather  than  explicitly  following  periodization  guidelines. 
Taken together these results suggest that, although peri-
odization  is  the  preeminent  training  planning  approach 
represented  in  the  literature,  its  principles  are  neither 
universally adhered to, nor pervasively accepted.

Anyadike‑Danes et al. Sports Medicine - Open           (2023) 9:109 

Page 11 of 12

Abbreviation
SCC 

 Strength and conditioning coaches

Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1186/ s40798‑ 023‑ 00657‑6.

Additional file 1. CHERRIES.

Additional file 2. Survey questions.

Additional file 3. Survey responses.

Acknowledgments
Not applicable

Author Contributions
The initial survey was designed and developed by KAD. The survey was 
revised by KAD, and JK. Data was collected by KAD. KAD analyzed the data and 
prepared the first draft. The manuscript was revised by JK, and LD. All authors 
approved of the final version to be published and agree to be accountable for 
any part of the work.

Funding
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.

Availability of Data and Materials
Add data is stored and secured on the primary investigators institutional 
Microsoft OneDrive. Data is available on reasonable request.

Declarations

Ethical Approval and Consent to Participate
The current study was approved by the German Sport University Cologne 
ethics committee (Ethical Proposal Code 136/2021). All respondents provided 
informed consent before participating in the survey.

Consent for Publication
All respondents provided consent for anonymous data use for research 
purposes and publications.

Competing Interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Author details
1 Department of Intervention Research in Exercise Training, German Sport 
University Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 2 Faculty of Education and Health Sci‑
ences, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland. 

Received: 14 June 2023   Accepted: 7 November 2023

References
 1. 

Stone MH, Hornsby WG, Haff GG, Fry AC, Suarez DG, Liu J, et al. Periodiza‑
tion and block periodization in sports: emphasis on strength‑power 
training‑a provocative and challenging narrative. J Strength Cond Res. 
2021;35:2351–71.

 2.  Krüger A. From Russia with Love? Sixty years of proliferation of LP Mat‑

veyev’s concept of Periodisation? Staps. 2016;114:51–9.

 3.  Kataoka R, Vasenina E, Loenneke J, Buckner SL. Periodization: varia‑

tion in the definition and discrepancies in study design. Sports Med. 
2021;51:625–51.

 4.  Cunanan AJ, DeWeese BH, Wagle JP, Carroll KM, Sausaman R, Hornsby 

WG, et al. The General Adaptation Syndrome: A Foundation for the Con‑
cept of Periodization. Sports Med. 2018;1–11.

 5.  Haff GG, Triplett NT. Essentials of strength training and conditioning. 

4th ed. Champaign: Human kinetics; 2015.

 6.  Weldon A, Duncan MJ, Turner A, Lockie RG, Loturco I. Practices of 

strength and conditioning coaches in professional sports: a systematic 
review. Biol Sport. 2021;39:715–26.

 7.  Weldon A, Duncan MJ, Turner A, Sampaio J, Noon M, Wong D, et al. 

 8. 

Contemporary practices of strength and conditioning coaches in 
professional soccer. Biol Sport. 2020;38:377–90.
Loturco I, Freitas TT, Alcaraz PE, Kobal R, Hartmann Nunes RF, Weldon A, 
et al. Practices of strength and conditioning coaches in Brazilian elite 
soccer. Biol Sport. 2022;39:779–91.

 9.  Zabaloy S, Tondelli E, Pereira LA, Freitas TT, Loturco I. Training and 

testing practices of strength and conditioning coaches in Argentinian 
Rugby Union. Int J Sports Sci Coach. 2022;17:1331–44.

 10.  Loturco I, Haugen T, Freitas TT, Bishop C, Moura TBMA, Mercer VP, et al. 

Strength and conditioning practices of Brazilian Olympic sprint and 
jump coaches. J Hum Kinet. 2023;86:175–94.

 12. 

 11.  The UK’s Professional Body for Strength and Conditioning [Internet]. 
UKSCA. [cited 2023 Jun 15]. Available from: https:// www. uksca. org. uk
IASC Level 2 Strength and Conditioning Coach (IASC‑SCC2) [Internet]. 
[cited 2023 Jun 15]. Available from: https:// iascfi tness. org/ cours es/ iasc‑ 
level‑2‑ stren gth‑ and‑ condi tioni ng‑ coach/
IQF Level 2 Certificate in S&C [Internet]. IUSCA. [cited 2023 Jun 15]. 
Available from: https:// www. iusca. org/ level2

 13. 

 14.  Level 1 | Course Information [Internet]. [cited 2023 Jun 15]. Available 

from: https:// www. stren gthan dcond ition ing. org/ level‑ 01‑ course ‑ infor 
mation

 15.  Afonso J, Clemente FM, Ribeiro J, Ferreira M, Fernandes RJ. Towards 
a de facto nonlinear periodization: extending nonlinearity from pro‑
gramming to periodizing. Sports (Basel). 2020;8:E110.

 16.  Bryman A. Social research methods. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 

2016.

 17.  He C, Trudel P, Culver DM. Actual and ideal sources of coaching knowl‑
edge of elite Chinese coaches. Int J Sports Sci Coach. 2018. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1177/ 17479 54117 753727.

 18.  Zhong Y, Weldon A, Bishop C, Li Y. Practices of strength and condition‑
ing coaches across Chinese high‑performance sports. Int J Sports Sci 
Coach. 2023. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 17479 54123 117649.

 19.  Romdhani M, Rae DE, Nédélec M, Ammar A, Chtourou H, Al Horani R, 
et al. COVID‑19 lockdowns: a worldwide survey of circadian rhythms 
and sleep quality in 3911 athletes from 49 countries, with data‑driven 
recommendations. Sports Med. 2022;52:1433–48.

 20.  Washif JA, Farooq A, Krug I, Pyne DB, Verhagen E, Taylor L, et al. Training 
during the COVID‑19 lockdown: knowledge, beliefs, and practices of 
12,526 athletes from 142 countries and six continents. Sports Med. 
2022;52:933–48.

 21.  Steele J, Androulakis‑Korakakis P, Carlson L, Williams D, Phillips S, Smith 
D, et al. The impact of coronavirus (COVID‑19) related public‑health 
measures on training behaviours of individuals previously participat‑
ing in resistance training: a cross‑sectional survey study. Sports Med. 
2021;51:1561–80.

 22.  Grandou C, Wallace L, Coutts AJ, Bell L, Impellizzeri FM. Symptoms of 

overtraining in resistance exercise: international cross‑sectional survey. 
Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2021;16:80–9.

 23.  Weldon A, Mak JTS, Wong ST, Duncan MJ, Clarke ND, Bishop C. Strength 
and conditioning practices and perspectives of volleyball coaches and 
players. Sports. 2021;9:28.

 24.  Dunlop G, Ardern CL, Andersen TE, Lewin C, Dupont G, Ashworth B, 

et al. Return‑to‑play practices following hamstring injury: a world‑
wide survey of 131 premier league football teams. Sports Med. 
2020;50:829–40.

 25.  Jones TW, Smith A, Macnaughton LS, French DN. Strength and condition‑
ing and concurrent training practices in Elite Rugby Union. J Strength 
Cond Res. 2016;30:3354–66.

 26.  Transue B. APA Style 7th edition. Library Staff Presentations & Publications 
[Internet]. 2019; Available from: https:// mosaic. messi ah. edu/ libst aff_ pub/ 
13

 27.  Krosnick JA. Improving question design to maximize reliability and valid‑
ity. In: Vannette DL, Krosnick JA, editors. The Palgrave handbook of survey 
research. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2018. p. 95–101. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978‑3‑ 319‑ 54395‑6_ 13.

 Anyadike‑Danes et al. Sports Medicine - Open           (2023) 9:109 

Page 12 of 12

 28.  Eysenbach G. Improving the Quality of Web Surveys: The Checklist for 
Reporting Results of Internet E‑Surveys (CHERRIES). J Med Internet Res. 
2004;6: e34.

 29.  Lucas SR. Beyond the existence proof: Ontological conditions, episte‑
mological implications, and in‑depth interview research. Qual Quant. 
2014;48:387–408.

 30.  Microsoft Excel Spreadsheet Software | Microsoft 365 [Internet]. [cited 
2023 Mar 11]. Available from: https:// www. micro soft. com/ en‑ us/ micro 
soft‑ 365/ excel

 53.  Pollack J. The changing paradigms of project management. Int J Project 

Manag. 2007;25:266–74.

 54.  Kiely J. Periodization theory: confronting an inconvenient truth. Sports 

Med. 2017;1–12.

 55.  Kiely J. Periodization theory: confronting an inconvenient truth. Sports 

Med. 2018;48(4):753–764.

 56.  Hubbard R, Haig BD, Parsa RA. The limited role of formal statistical infer‑

ence in scientific inference. Am Stat. 2019;73:91–8.

 57.  Ji L‑J, Nisbett RE, Su Y. Culture, change, and prediction. Psychol Sci. 

 31.  Kiely J. Periodization paradigms in the 21st century: evidence‑led or 

2001;12:450–6.

tradition‑driven? Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2012;7:242–50.
 32.  Afonso J, Nikolaidis PT, Sousa P, Mesquita I. Is empirical research on 

periodization trustworthy? A comprehensive review of conceptual and 
methodological issues. J Sports Sci Med. 2017;16:27–34.

 58.  Nichols R. Understanding East Asian holistic cognitive style and its 

cultural evolution: a multi‑disciplinary case study of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine. J Cult Cogn Sci. 2021;5:17–36.

 59.  Afonso J, Rocha T, Nikolaidis PT, Clemente FM, Rosemann T, Knechtle 

 33.  Ebben WP, Blackard DO. Strength and conditioning practices of National 

Football League strength and conditioning coaches. J Strength Cond Res. 
2001;15:48–58.

B. A systematic review of meta‑analyses comparing periodized and 
non‑periodized exercise programs: Why we should go back to original 
research. Front Physiol. 2019;10:1023.

 34.  Simenz CJ, Dugan CA, Ebben WP. Strength and conditioning practices 

 60.  Boland L, Kothari A, McCutcheon C, Graham ID, for the Integrated Knowl‑

edge Translation Research Network. Building an integrated knowledge 
translation (IKT) evidence base: colloquium proceedings and research 
direction. Health Research Policy and Systems. 2020;18:8.

 61.  Kothari A, Wathen CN. Integrated knowledge translation: digging deeper, 

 62. 

moving forward. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2017;71:619–23.
Interview with periodization coach Tudor Bompa [Internet]. Sports 
Performance Bulletin. 2017 [cited 2021 Oct 18]. Available from: https:// 
www. sport sperf orman cebul letin. com/ endur ance‑ train ing/ train ing‑ struc 
ture‑ and‑ plann ing/ inter view‑ perio dizat ion‑ coach‑ tudor‑ bompa/

Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in pub‑
lished maps and institutional affiliations.

of National Basketball Association strength and conditioning coaches. J 
Strength Cond Res. 2005;19:495–504.

 35.  Gee TI, Olsen PD, Berger NJ, Golby J, Thompson KG. Strength and condi‑
tioning practices in rowing. J Strength Cond Res. 2011;25:668–82.
 36.  Ebben WP, Hintz MJ, Simenz CJ. Strength and conditioning practices of 
Major League Baseball strength and conditioning coaches. J Strength 
Cond Res. 2005;19:538–46.

 37.  Ebben WP, Carroll RM, Simenz CJ. Strength and conditioning practices of 
National Hockey League strength and conditioning coaches. J Strength 
Cond Res. 2004;18:889–97.

 38.  Weldon A, Duncan MJ, Turner A, Christie CJ, Pang CM. Contemporary 

practices of strength and conditioning coaches in professional cricket. Int 
J Sports Sci Coach. 2021;16:585–600.

 39.  Kaufman RA, Rojas AM, Mayer H. Needs Assessment: A User’s Guide. 

Educational Technology; 1993.

 40.  Leigh D, Watkins R, Platt WA, Kaufman R. Alternate models of needs 

assessment: selecting the right one for your organization. Hum Resour 
Dev Q. 2000;11:87–93.

 41.  Periodization [Internet]. 2023 [cited 2023 Jun 9]. Available from: https:// 

dicti onary. cambr idge. org/ dicti onary/ engli sh/ perio dizat ion

 42.  Nieto‑Rodriguez A. Harvard business review project management 

handbook: how to launch, lead, and sponsor successful projects. Boston: 
Harvard Business Press; 2021.

 43.  Sanna LJ, Parks CD, Chang EC, Carter SE. The hourglass is half full or half 

empty: temporal framing and the group planning fallacy. Group Dyn 
Theory Res Pract. 2005;9:173–88.
Issurin V. Block periodization versus traditional training theory: a review. J 
Sports Med Phys Fit. 2008;48:65–75.

 44. 

 45.  Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning, 4ed [Internet]. [cited 

2023 Feb 21]. Available from: https:// www. nsca. com/ store/ produ ct‑ 
detail/ INV/ 97817 18210 868/ 97817 18210 868

 46.  Morin JB, Capelo‑Ramirez F, Rodriguez‑Perez MA, Cross MR, Jimenez‑
Reyes P. Individual adaptation kinetics following heavy resisted sprint 
training. J Strength Cond Res [Internet]. 2020/02/15 ed. 2020; Available 
from: https:// www. ncbi. nlm. nih. gov/ pubmed/ 32058 358

 47.  Marrier B, Robineau J, Piscione J, Lacome M, Peeters A, Hausswirth C, et al. 

Supercompensation kinetics of physical qualities during a taper in team‑
sport athletes. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2017;12:1163–9.

 48.  Lahti J, Jiménez‑Reyes P, Cross MR, Samozino P, Chassaing P, Simond‑Cote 
B, et al. Individual sprint force‑velocity profile adaptations to in‑season 
assisted and resisted velocity‑based training in professional rugby. Sports 
(Basel). 2020;8:E74.

 49.  Marsh CE, Thomas HJ, Naylor LH, Scurrah KJ, Green DJ. Fitness and 

strength responses to distinct exercise modes in twins: S tudies of T win 
R esponses to U nderstand E xercise as a TH erapy (STRUETH) study. The 
Journal of Physiology. 2020;

 50.  Matveev LP, Zdornyj AP. Fundamentals of sports training. Progress; 1981.
 51.  Del Giudice M, Bonafiglia JT, Islam H, Preobrazenski N, Amato A, Gurd BJ. 
Investigating the reproducibility of maximal oxygen uptake responses to 
high‑intensity interval training. J Sci Med Sport. 2020;23:94–9.

 52.  Neumann ND, Van Yperen NW, Brauers JJ, Frencken W, Brink MS, Lemmink 
KAPM, et al. Nonergodicity in load and recovery: group results do not 
generalize to individuals. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2022;17:391–9.
