---
pmid: 37989901
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/37989901
title: Chronic kidney disease may evoke anxiety by altering CRH expression in the amygdala and tryptophan metabolism in rats.
---

Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00424-023-02884-y

INTEGRATIVE PHYSIOLOGY

Chronic kidney disease may evoke anxiety by altering CRH expression 
in the amygdala and tryptophan metabolism in rats

Katalin Eszter Ibos1 
Zsuzsanna Z. A. Kovács3 
István Szatmári6 

 · Éva Bodnár1 

 · Hoa Dinh2 

 · Merse Kis1,3 

 · Fanni Márványkövi3 

 · 

 · Andrea Siska4 
 · Péter Simon6 · Márta Sárközy1,3 

 · Imre Földesi4 

 · Zsolt Galla5 
 · Krisztina Csabafi1 

 · Péter Monostori5 

 · 

Received: 26 June 2023 / Revised: 28 October 2023 / Accepted: 8 November 2023 / Published online: 22 November 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023

Abstract
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is associated with anxiety; however, its exact mechanism is not well understood. Therefore, 
the aim of the present study was to assess the effect of moderate CKD on anxiety in rats. 5/6 nephrectomy was performed 
in male Wistar rats. 7 weeks after, anxiety-like behavior was assessed by elevated plus maze (EPM), open field (OF), and 
marble burying (MB) tests. At weeks 8 and 9, urinalysis was performed, and blood and amygdala samples were collected, 
respectively. In the amygdala, the gene expression of Avp and the gene and protein expression of Crh, Crhr1, and Crhr2 were 
analyzed. Furthermore, the plasma concentration of corticosterone, uremic toxins, and tryptophan metabolites was measured 
by UHPLC-MS/MS. Laboratory tests confirmed the development of CKD. In the CKD group, the closed arm time increased; 
the central time and the total number of entries decreased in the EPM. There was a reduction in rearing, central distance and 
time in the OF, and fewer interactions with marbles were detected during MB. CKD evoked an upregulation of gene expres-
sion of Crh, Crhr1, and Crhr2, but not Avp, in the amygdala. However, there was no alteration in protein expression. In the 
CKD group, plasma concentrations of p-cresyl-sulfate, indoxyl-sulfate, kynurenine, kynurenic acid, 3-hydroxykynurenine, 
anthranilic acid, xanthurenic acid, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, picolinic acid, and quinolinic acid increased. However, the 
levels of tryptophan, tryptamine, 5-hydroxytryptophan, serotonin, and tyrosine decreased. In conclusion, moderate CKD 
evoked anxiety-like behavior that might be mediated by the accumulation of uremic toxins and metabolites of the kynurenine 
pathway, but the contribution of the amygdalar CRH system to the development of anxiety seems to be negligible at this stage.

Keywords  Chronic kidney disease · Anxiety · Amygdala · Kynurenine · Corticotropine-releasing hormone · Uremic toxins

Introduction

According to the current guideline of the Kidney Disease 
Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) initiative, chronic 
kidney disease (CKD) is defined as decreased kidney func-
tion shown by glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of less than 
60 mL/min per 1.73  m2, or markers of kidney damage, or 
both, of at least 3-month duration. CKD is classified into 
several stages based on glomerular filtration rate and the 
extent of albuminuria [90].

The global burden of CKD is substantial, with more than 

800 million people affected worldwide [46].

Márta Sárközy and Krisztina Csabafi contributed equally to this 
work.

Extended author information available on the last page of the article

The progressive loss of kidney function results in a wide 
range of systemic complications, including anemia, elec-
trolyte abnormalities, arterial hypertension, mineral bone 
disorder, and cardiovascular disease [2, 67]. Many patients 
also suffer from neurological sequelae, such as cognitive 
impairment, cerebrovascular diseases, and peripheral neu-
ropathy [94], as well as mood disorders, i.e., anxiety and 
depression [27].

The prevalence of anxiety in end-stage kidney disease 
(ESKD) has been estimated to be around 12 to 52% [57], 
whereas in stages 3 and 4 of CKD 24.8% and 29.9%, respec-
tively [49]. Multiple studies have identified an alarming link 
between anxiety and adverse clinical outcome in CKD [27]. 
Anxiety has been associated with more frequent hospitali-
zations, poor adherence to dialysis and an increased risk 
of all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in ESKD patients 

Vol.:(0123456789)1 3180 

Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196

[72]. However, experimental data regarding anxiety in ani-
mal models of CKD have been scarce and controversial.

In recent years, a few studies have been conducted to 
characterize the effect of CKD on anxiety. Some results 
indicated an anxiogenic effect [41, 92], others have found 
CKD to be anxiolytic [16, 55, 80], and a very recent article 
reported that 2, 4, and 6 months after 5/6 nephrectomy in 
rats, no behavioral alterations were detected [65].

The background of anxiety in CKD has not been clearly 
described yet, though several hypotheses have emerged in 
the past decades.

Firstly,  a  hallmark  of  advancing  CKD  is  the  gradual 
retention of uremic toxins: organic solutes that accumulate 
in uremic patients and—in high concentrations—interact 
negatively with biological functions [81]. Apart from small, 
water-soluble compounds (e.g., urea, ammonia, asymmetric 
dimethyl-arginine), uremic toxins also include protein-bound 
compounds (e.g., indoxyl-sulfate, p-cresyl sulfate, kynure-
nine) and middle molecules of larger molecular weight (e.g., 
β2-microglobulin, atrial natriuretic peptide) [82]. Although 
protein-bound compounds had long been neglected due to 
their complicated kinetics and difficult removal by hemo-
dialysis, recently, a growing number of publications have 
addressed the biological effects of these solutes [84].

Two  compounds,  indoxyl-sulfate  (IS)  and  p-cresyl-
sulfate  (pCS),  have  been  implicated  in  anxiety-like  and 
depression-like behavior. In fact, in preclinical studies, the 
administration of IS in the drinking water of rodents has 
led to its accumulation in the CNS, modulating monoamine 
levels in several brain regions and causing anxiety-like and 
depression-like behavior, reduced locomotion and cognitive 
impairment [38, 76]. In patients with major depressive disor-
der, serum IS concentrations have positively correlated with 
total anxiety, psychic anxiety, and resting state functional 
connectivity of brain regions processing aversive stimuli 
[10].

Similarly to IS, pCS has also been associated with behav-
ioral alterations in mice that underwent unilateral nephrec-
tomy. After intraperitoneal pCS administration for 7 weeks, 
the  animals  developed  anxiety-like  and  depressive-like 
behavior, as well as significant impairment in learning and 
spatial memory. These changes have been accompanied by 
a decrease in serum BDNF and serotonin concentrations and 
an increase in serum corticosterone levels. Moreover, pCS 
has inhibited neurotrophin-related intracellular signaling and 
induced oxidative stress and neuroinflammation [77].

Kynurenine (KYN) and other metabolites of the kynure-
nine pathway constitute another group of uremic toxins with 
immense biological significance. The KYN pathway is the 
main route for tryptophan (Trp) catabolism, controlled by the 
activity of 2 key enzymes: the hepatic tryptophan 2,3-dioxy-
genase (TDO) and indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) [59]. 
In CKD, multiple studies have reported an increase in KYN 

metabolites, some of which (e.g., 3-hydroxy-kynurenine 
(3-OH-KYN)) have been associated with increased oxida-
tive stress, while others (e.g., kynurenic acid (KYNA)) have 
anti-inflammatory properties [3, 66, 88]. The main driver 
of KYN pathway activation in CKD is most likely chronic 
inflammation since inflammatory cytokines (such as IFN-γ, 
and TNF-α) activate IDO [95]. It is well established that 
CKD is associated with a pathological increase in the pro-
duction of inflammatory cytokines, as well as reactive oxy-
gen and nitrogen species (ROS, RNS) [35, 74]. A cohort 
study involving almost 4000 patients with CKD has also 
demonstrated a correlation between the plasma concen-
tration of inflammatory biomarkers (IL-1β, IL-1 receptor 
antagonist, IL-6, TNF-α, C-reactive protein, and fibrinogen) 
and estimated GFR [28].

In addition, anxiety in CKD might be mediated by the 
dysregulation of the stress system. Corticotropin-releasing 
hormone (CRH) and arginine vasopressin (AVP) are central 
regulators of the stress system that govern the endocrine 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Wallace et al. 
have described an elevation of mean morning plasma cor-
tisol concentration, an indicator of HPA axis activity, and 
an increase in 24-h total cortisol concentration with normal 
rhythmicity and resistance to dexamethasone suppression in 
ESKD patients [86]. Similarly, the progressive deterioration 
of kidney function from stage 1 to 4 has been associated 
with a continuous elevation of late-night salivary cortisol 
concentration. In some patients with stage 2–4 CKD, 1 mg 
of dexamethasone has not been sufficient to suppress cortisol 
secretion, pointing to the early disruption of feedback con-
trol [12]. CRH and AVP also by their expression in extrahy-
pothalamic sites, such as in the amygdala-related circuitry 
[93], may mediate the stress-associated behavior. So far, it 
has not been explored in the literature if the expression of 
the CRH system and AVP is altered in any way in CKD. 
However, in ESKD patients, decreased functional connec-
tivity has been detected in the amygdala by fMRI [14, 51] 
suggesting that an altered amygdala function might play a 
role in CKD-induced anxiety.

Considering the abovementioned data, the present study 
aimed to assess the effect of moderate CKD on anxiety in 
rats and to investigate if indeed uremic metabolites, altered 
HPA activity, and amygdalar CRH and AVP expression pat-
terns might mediate the CKD-induced anxiety-like behavior. 
For that purpose, CKD was induced by 5/6 nephrectomy in 
adult male Wistar rats and confirmed by laboratory tests. 
At week 7, the animals underwent EPM, computerized OF, 
and marble burying (MB) tests to investigate anxiety-like 
behavior and locomotor activity. Two weeks after, the level 
of multiple plasma metabolites (including corticosterone, 
uremic toxins, compounds of tryptophan metabolism) was 
determined to create a complex metabolic profile of the 5/6 
nephrectomy rat model. As HPA axis activation has been 

1 3Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196 

181

implicated in both CKD and anxiety, the expression of argi-
nine vasopressin (Avp), corticotropin-releasing hormone 
(Crh), and CRH receptor 1 (Crhr1) and 2 (Crhr2) genes 
was determined in the amygdala, followed by analysis of 
protein expression.

Materials and methods

Animals

Adult male Wistar rats weighing 250–300 g were used in this 
study. Animals were housed in pairs in individually venti-
lated cages (Sealsafe IVC system, Italy) in a temperature-
controlled room with a 12/12-h light/dark cycle. Standard rat 
chow and tap water were supplied ad libitum.

The animals were kept and handled during the experi-
ments in accordance with the instructions of the Univer-
sity  of  Szeged  Ethical  Committee  for  the  Protection  of 
Animals in Research, which approved these experiments 
(XV./799/2019).

Experimental setup

CKD was induced by 5/6 nephrectomy. On the  7th post-oper-
ative week, the animals underwent EPM, computerized OF, 
and MB tests to investigate anxiety-like behavior and loco-
motor activity. Urine, blood, and amygdala samples were 
collected on the  8th and  9th week, respectively, for further 
analysis. Figure 1 summarizes the timeline of procedures.

Partial 5/6 nephrectomy

The animals underwent sham operation or 5/6 nephrectomy 
in two phases as described previously [68–70]. Anesthesia 
was induced by intraperitoneal (ip.) pentobarbital sodium 
(Euthasol; 40 mg/kg; Produlab Pharma b.v., Raamsdonks-
veer,  The  Netherlands).  Laparotomy  was  performed  to 
expose the left kidney followed by dissection of the adipose 
tissue and the renal capsule. Both poles were ligated approx-
imately at the 1/3 position; then, the poles were excised.

One week after the first operation, a total right nephrec-
tomy was performed following the same steps described 
above, in which the right kidney was dissected. The adrenal 
gland was gently freed and placed back into the abdomi-
nal cavity. Following the ligation of the ureter and renal 
blood vessels, the right kidney was removed. Control ani-
mals were subjected to a sham operation, during of which 
the renal capsule was removed. After both surgeries, the 
incision was closed with running sutures, and povidone 
iodide was applied to the surface of the skin. Subcutane-
ous (sc.) nalbuphine hydrochloride (0.3 mg/kg; Nalbuphine 
10 mg/ml; TEVA, Debrecen, Hungary) was administered as 

Fig. 1   Experimental  protocol.  The  second  stage  of  5/6  nephrectomy 
is considered “week 0”

a post-operative medication. Antibiotics (Enroxil, 75 mg; 
Krka,  Slovenia)  and  analgesics  (10 mg/L  of  nalbuphine 
hydrochloride, Nalbuphine; TEVA) were administered in 
tap water for 2 days after both surgeries.

Blood test and urinalysis

Urine creatinine and total protein levels

At week 8, a subgroup of animals was placed in metabolic 
cages (Tecniplast, Italy) to collect urine for 24 h. To verify 
the development of CKD, urine creatinine and urine protein 
levels were measured by standard laboratory methods as 
described previously [43, 68]. Moreover, the urine protein/
creatinine ratio was calculated to assess proteinuria.

Serum carbamide and creatinine levels

Blood was collected from the thoracic aorta at week 9 to 
measure serum carbamide (urea) and creatinine levels to 
verify the development of CKD. Urea and creatinine levels 
in serum were quantified by the kinetic UV method using 
urease and glutamate dehydrogenase enzymes and the Jaffe 
method, respectively. The reagents and the platform analyz-
ers were from Roche Diagnostics (Mannheim, Germany) 
[68, 69].

1 3182 

Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196

Calculation of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR)

The calculation of eGFR at week 9 was performed using 
serum creatinine and urea concentrations, as well as body 
weight. The following formulae by Besseling et al. were 
used [5]:

Plasma creatinine <

52μmol
L

∶ eGFR = 880 × W 0.695 × C−0.660 × U−0.391

energy,  retention  time:  12.50  min.  MRM  transition  of 
IS was 211.9/131.9 using −50 V as declustering poten-
tial and −25 V as collision energy, retention time: 11.48 
min. MRM transition of Picolinic acid was 124.0/106.0 
using 75 V as declustering potential and 13 V as colli-
sion energy, retention time: 1.21 min. MRM transition of 
Corticosterone was 347.2/121.1 using 50 V as decluster-
ing potential and 30 V as collision energy, retention time: 
13.14 min.

Plasma creatinine > 52 μmol∕L ∶ eGFR = 5862 × W 0.695 × C−1.150 × U−0.391

In the formulae, W is body weight (g), C is serum creati-
nine concentration (μmol/L), and U is serum urea concentra-
tion (mmol/L).

Behavioral tests

Elevated plus maze

Serum ion levels

Serum sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, phosphate, 
and chloride levels were determined by indirect potentiom-
etry using ion-selective electrodes at week 9. All reagents 
and instruments were from Roche Diagnostics (Mannheim, 
Germany) [68].

Synthesis of p‑cresyl‑sulfate (pCS)

The applied p-cresyl-sulfate (pCS) was synthesized based 
on  the  literature  method  [54]  implementing  different 
optimizations.

To the stirred solution of p-cresol (1.0 g; 9.26 mmol) in 
10 mL cooled pyridine 1.3 g (11.16 mmol) of chlorosulfonic 
acid was added dropwise while maintaining the tempera-
ture. Stirring it for 8 h, aqueous KOH (50 %) was added in 
excess to basify the solution. The basic solution was stirred 
at room temperature for an additional 1 h; then, the formed 
salts were filtered and washed with diethyl ether. From the 
crystals, warm ethanol was used to extract the cresyl-sulfate 
salt; then, after concentration, the residue was crystallized 
with cool ethanol and recrystallized from ethanol: diisopro-
pyl ether (1:1). Yield: 1.47 g (70%), white powder, m. p.: 
188–190°C.

The structure and the purity of the synthesized pCS were 
supported by its 1H-NMR (see Figure S1 in the Supplement 
[https:// data. mende ley. com/ datas ets/ gg2nr  gfnzb/ draft?a= 
91893 794- 72f9- 4804- 8f73- a80c5 a429c 90]).

Measurement of plasma metabolites

Plasma samples were collected at week 9, prepared [24], 
and  measured  [23]  according  to  previously  published 
methodologies  using  ultra-high  performance  liquid 
chromatography-tandem  mass  spectrometry  (UHPLC-
MS/MS). MRM transition of pCS was 186.9/107.0 using 
−50 V as declustering potential and −26 V as collision 

Anxiety-like  behavior  was  assessed  using  the  EPM  at 
week 7. The EPM apparatus is a plus-shaped platform 50 
cm above the ground. The maze consists of four arms (50 
cm x 10 cm each): two opposing open arms and two closed 
arms enclosed by a 10 cm high wall. The test is based 
on two conflicting motivations of rodents: to avoid open, 
brightly lit spaces and to explore novel environments. The 
avoidance of open arms reflects anxiety-like behavior [85]. 
The experiments were conducted between 8 a.m. and 10 
a.m. The apparatus was cleaned with 96% ethyl alcohol 
after each session. Rats were placed in the maze facing 
one of the open arms; then, their behavior was recorded 
by a camera suspended above the maze for 5 min. The time 
spent in each arm, as well as the number of entries per arm 
were registered by an observer blind to the experimental 
groups.

Open field

The  novelty-induced  locomotor  activity  of  rats  was 
assessed using the Conducta 1.0 System (Experimetria 
Ltd., Hungary) 7 weeks after nephrectomy. The system 
consists of five black plastic OF arenas (inside dimen-
sions: 48×48 cm, height: 40 cm) with 5 horizontal rows 
of infrared diodes on the walls to register both horizontal 
and vertical locomotion. The center of each box is illumi-
nated by a LED lightbulb (230 lumens) from above the 
box. The central zone of the arena is defined as a 24×24 
cm  area  in  the  center  of  the  box.  The  OF  experiments 
were conducted between 8 a.m. and 10 a.m. 7 weeks after 
nephrectomy. The rats were placed in the center of the box 
and their behavior was recorded by the Conducta computer 
program for 5 min. Six behavioral parameters were meas-
ured during the experiment: total time and total distance of 
ambulation, immobility time, number of rearings (vertical 
locomotion), time spent in the central zone (central area 
of 24×24 cm), and distance traveled in the central zone. 
The apparatus was cleaned with 96% ethyl alcohol after 
each session.

1 3Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196 

183

Marble burying

MB  is  a  regularly  used  paradigm  for  the  assessment  of 
anxiety-like and compulsive-like behavior [9] that was per-
formed 7 weeks after nephrectomy. Our protocol was based 
on the method described by Schneider and Popik [71]. The 
animals were removed from their plexiglass home cages 
(420×275×180 mm) and temporarily moved into another 
cage before the experiment. Meanwhile, the home cage was 
prepared for the experiment by increasing the depth of bed-
ding material to 5 cm and arranging 9 glass marbles of 2.5 
cm diameter in 3 rows along the shorter wall of the cage. 
The experiment was conducted for 10 min and recorded by 
a video camera above the cage. After the session, the ani-
mal was removed from the cage and the number of buried 
marbles (>50% marble covered by bedding material) was 
counted. The marbles were cleaned with 96% ethyl alcohol 
after each session. After the experiment, the count and dura-
tion of two types of goal-oriented interactions with marbles 
(burying of marbles and moving marbles without burying 
them) were assessed by an observer blind to the experimen-
tal group.

Gene expression

Sample preparation

Following decapitation, the brains of the rats were gen-
tly removed and immediately dissected with a pre-cooled 
adult rat brain matrix (Ted Pella Inc., Redding, CA, USA) 
at  week  9.  Next,  brains  were  manually  sliced  with  pre-
cooled razor blades in coronal sections (1 mm slots), after 
of which a 2-mm tissue puncher was used to obtain samples 
of the amygdala, according to the brain atlas of Paxinos 
[63]. The tissue samples were stored in 1 mL of TRIzol 
(UD-GenoMed, Hungary) in Eppendorf tubes and kept in 
a freezer at -80°C.

RNA purification

of incubation at room temperature, the samples were cen-
trifuged for 15 min at 13000 g at 4°C (Heraeus Fresco 17, 
Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Approximately 500 μL of 
supernatant was collected from each tube and transferred to 
new Eppendorf tubes containing 600 μL of cold 96% alcohol 
that was stored overnight at -20°C. On the following day, 
GeneJET RNA Purification Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 
USA) was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 
The concentration of the purified samples was calculated 
based on the average of three measurements with a spec-
trophotometer (NanoDrop  OneC, Thermo Fisher Scientific, 
USA).

cDNA synthesis

A volume containing 300 ng of RNA was obtained from 
each sample for cDNA synthesis. The first strand cDNA was 
synthesized using the Maxima First Strand cDNA Synthesis 
Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) according to the manu-
facturer’s instructions.

RT‑qPCR

The qPCR reaction mix was prepared using the Luminaris 
Color HiGreen Low ROX qPCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. A total volume of 10 μL of reaction mix was prepared, 
containing 5 μL of Master Mix, 0.3 μL of forward primer, 
0.3 μL of reverse primer, 1.67 μL of cDNA, and 2.73 μL 
of nuclease-free water. The custom primers correspond-
ing to the Avp, Crh, Crhr1, and Crhr2 genes are shown in 
Table 1. The mix was placed in a thermal cycler (C1000 
Touch Thermal Cycler, BioRad) which was programmed 
according to the cycling protocol in Table 2. The expression 
of each gene relative to GAPDH was determined using the 
ΔΔCT method.

Western blot

The tissue samples underwent ultrasonic homogenization 
(Branson Sonifier 250, Emerson, USA); then, 200 μL of 
chloroform was added to each sample. Following 10 min 

As described previously, a standard Western blot technique 
was used [22, 45] to investigate the expression at the pro-
tein level of CRH (21 kDa) with β-actin (45 kDa); CRHR1 
(50 kDa), and CRHR2 (47 kDa) with GAPDH (37 kDa) 

Table 1   Custom primers

Forward

Reverse

Avp
Crh
Crhr1
Crhr2
Gapdh

5′-CTG ACA TGG AGC TGA GAC AGT-3′
5′-TGG TGT GGA GAA ACT CAG AGC-3′
5′-CGA AGA GAA GAA GAG CAA AGT ACA C-3′
5′-CCC GAA GGT CCC TAC TCC TA-3′
5′-CGG CCA AAT CTG AGG CAA GA -3′

5′-CGC AGC TCT CGT CGC T-3′
5′-CAT GTT AGG GGC GCT CTC TTC-3′
5′-GCG TAG GAT GAA AGC CGA GA-3′
5′-CTG CTT GTC ATC CAA AAT GGG T-3′
5′TTT TGT GAT GCG TGT GTA GCG-3′

1 3184 

Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196

Table 2   qPCR cycling protocol

Step

Temperature 
°C

Time

Number 
of cycles

blot images are presented in Supplementary Figures S2-4 
(https:// data. mende ley. com/ datas ets/ gg2nr  gfnzb/ draft?a= 
91893 794- 72f9- 4804- 8f73- a80c5 a429c 90).

UDG pre-treatment
Initial denaturation
Denaturation
Annealing
Extension

50
95
95
60
72

1
1
40

2 min
10 min
15 s
30 s
30 s

loading  background.  Amygdala  samples  (n=26)  were 
homogenized with an ultrasonicator (UP100H, Hielscher 
Ultrasonics  GmbH,  Germany)  in  Radio-Immunoprecip-
itation Assay (RIPA) buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0), 
150 mM NaCl, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 5 mM ethylen-
ediamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA), 0.1% sodium dodecyl 
sulfate, 1% NP-40; Cell Signaling Technology Inc., USA) 
supplemented with phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF; 
Sigma-Aldrich, USA), sodium orthovanadate  (Na3VO4 ; 
Sigma-Aldrich, USA), and sodium fluoride (NaF; Sigma-
Aldrich, USA). The crude homogenates were centrifuged at 
15,000×g for 30 min at 4 °C. After quantifying the superna-
tants’ protein concentrations using the BCA Protein Assay 
Kit (Pierce Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA), 50 μg of 
reduced and denaturized protein was loaded. Then sodium 
dodecyl-sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-
PAGE, 50 V, 5 h) was performed on 12% gel for CRH and 
10% gel for CRHR1 and CRHR2, followed by the transfer 
of proteins onto a nitrocellulose membrane (10% methanol, 
35 V, 2 h). The efficacy of transfer was checked using Pon-
ceau staining. The membranes were cut vertically and hori-
zontally into parts corresponding to the molecular weights 
of each protein. Membranes were blocked for 1 h in 5% 
(w/v) bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) 
supplemented with  Na3VO4 and NaF, and were incubated 
with  primary  antibodies  in  the  concentrations  of  1:500 
against CRH (# BS-0382R, ThermoFisher Scientific Inc., 
USA) and CRHR1 (#SAB4500465, Sigma-Aldrich, USA); 
1:1000 against CRHR2 (#SAB4500466, Sigma-Aldrich, 
USA) and β-actin (#4970S, Cell Signaling Technology Inc., 
USA) and 1:5000 against GAPDH (#2118, Cell Signaling 
Technology Inc., USA) overnight at 4 °C in 5% BSA. Then 
the membranes were incubated with IRDye 800CW Goat 
Anti-Rabbit (LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, USA, in 
the concentration of 1:20000) for 1 h at room temperature 
in 5% BSA to detect proteins with similar molecular weight 
on the same membrane where it is applicable. Fluorescent 
signals were detected by the Odyssey CLx machine (LI-COR 
Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, USA), and digital images were 
analyzed and evaluated by densitometry with Quantity One 
Software (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., USA). The full-length 
Ponceau-stained membranes and corresponding Western 

Statistical analysis

Data are presented as means ± SD. All statistical analy-
ses were performed using GraphPad Prism 9.1.2. Graphs 
and figures were created using GraphPad Prism 9.1.2 and 
Microsoft PowerPoint 2016. Unpaired t-test was used for the 
statistical analyses of the blood test and urinalysis results. 
Welch’s unpaired t-test was employed for the evaluation 
of OF test results. The EPM, MB, and PCR findings were 
assessed using Mann-Whitney’s test. A probability level of 
0.05 or less was accepted as indicating a statistically signifi-
cant difference.

Results

Blood test and urinalysis confirmed 
the development of CKD

The results of the blood test and urinalysis are summarized 
in Table 3. Compared to the sham-operated group, a signifi-
cant increase in serum carbamide (p<0.0001) and creatinine 
(p<0.0001) concentrations was detected 9 weeks after 2/3 
nephrectomy. Likewise, serum potassium (p=0.0329), cal-
cium (p=0.0013), magnesium (p=0.0083), and phosphate 
(p=0.0413) concentrations were elevated in the CKD group. 
The eGFR significantly decreased (p<0.0001) in the CKD 
group. Moreover, the urinalysis showed a reduction in urine 
creatinine level (p=0.0045), as well as a rise in urine pro-
tein concentration (p=0.0259) in the CKD group. Proteinu-
ria was further supported by the substantial increase in the 
urine protein/creatinine ratio (p=0.0090).

Trp metabolism shifted from the indole 
and serotonin pathways to the kynurenine pathway

The  results  of  plasma  metabolite  analysis  are  summa-
rized in Table 4. Compared to the sham-operated group, 
in the CKD group a significant increase was found in the 
concentrations of pCS (p=0.0082), IS (p=0.0044), KYN 
(p=0.0190), KYNA (p=0.0045), 3-OH-KYN (p=0.0024), 
anthranilic acid (AA) (p=0.0096), xanthurenic acid (XA) 
(p=0.0199),  5-hydroxy  indole  acetic  acid  (5-HIAA) 
(p=0.0056),  picolinic  acid  (PA)  (p=0.0167),  and  qui-
nolinic acid (QA) (p=0.0058). There was a significant 
decrease,  however,  in  the  levels  of  Trp  (p =0.0009), 
tryptamine  (TPA)  (p =0.0206),  5-hydroxytryptophan 
(5-HTP)  (p =0.0145),  serotonin  (5-HT)  (p =0.0422), 
and tyrosine (Tyr) (p=0.0124). Both the KYN/Trp and 

1 3Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196 

Table 3   Results of the blood 
test and urinalysis 9 weeks 
after 5/6 nephrectomy. *p<0.05 
vs sham; **p<0.01 vs sham; 
***p<0.001 vs sham; n=6–11

Serum  Na+ (mmol/L)
Serum  K+ (mmol/L)
Serum  Ca2+ (mmol/L)
Serum  Mg2+ (mmol/L)
3- (mmol/L)
Serum  PO4
Serum  Cl- (mmol/L)
Serum carbamide (BUN) (mmol/L)
Serum creatinine (μmol/L)
Estimated glomerular filtration rate 

(eGFR) (μL/min)

Urine creatinine (μmol/L)
Urine protein (mg/dL)
Urine protein/creatinine ratio (mg/g)

185

p

0.5693
*0.0329
**0.0013
**0.0083
*0.0413

0.9629
***<0.0001
***<0.0001
***<0.0001

CKD

Mean

142.5
5.736
2.782
1.279
2.873
102.5
18.76
70.88
659.7

SD

2.659
0.7004
0.1414
0.3390
0.5683
3.503
3.230
17.62
295

3972
655.1
24826.6

1668
472.2
16915.8

**0.0045
*0.0259
**0.0090

Sham

Mean

141.9
5.180
2.601
0.9490
2.452
102.4
7.744
24.67
3117

7668
152.9
3185.8

SD

2.424
0.3190
0.05507
0.1046
0.2227
1.075
0.5151
2.693
372.2

3499
97.77
2779.8

Table 4   Plasma metabolites measured by UHPLC-MS/MS 9 weeks after 5/6 nephrectomy. *p<0.05 vs sham; **p<0.01 vs sham; ***p<0.001 vs 
sham; n=7–8

Uremic toxins

HPA axis

Kynurenine pathway

Serotonin/indole pathway

Tyrosine metabolites

nmol/L

p-cresyl sulfate
Indoxyl sulfate
Corticosterone
Tryptophan
Kynurenine
Kynurenine/tryptophan
Kynurenic acid
Kynurenic acid/kynurenine
3-OH-kynurenine
3-OH-kynurenine/kynurenine
Anthranilic acid
Xanthurenic acid
Quinaldic acid
Picolinic acid
Quinolinic acid
Tryptamine
Indole-3-acetic acid
5-OH-tryptophan
Serotonin
5-hidroxy-indole-acetic acid
Tyrosine
3-O-methyldopa

Sham

Mean

1937
3366
1206
67350
1943
0.0294
90.34
0.0461
21.00
0.0108
14.40
77.65
54.55
147.7
269.7
4.038
684.1
4.925
746.6
86.49
63070
68.04

CKD

Mean

7876
9319
1144
50411
3464
0.0708
210.1
0.0614
68.03
0.0202
26.33
153.9
43.12
226.7
1256
2.357
697.8
3.608
297.1
210.7
53384
62.07

SD

1113
720.7
289.5
8067
452.3
0.0083
30.32
0.0081
5.882
0.0011
4.669
29.13
28.75
38.74
178.4
1.541
273.2
0.9910
461.1
15.31
6016
14.68

SD

4122
3602
291.0
7189
1275
0.0282
74.85
0.0175
25.47
0.0063
8.592
64.3
21.95
62.78
638.8
0.7713
341.7
0.8187
296.6
79.12
6697
5.060

t(df)

p

t(6.766)=3.696
t(6.421)=4.298
t(12.72)=0.4161
t(12.99)=4.300
t(7.318)=2.995
t(6.918)=3.741
t(7.710)=3.958
t(8.247)=2.120
t(6.561)=4.775
t(6.295)=3.938
t(8.987)=3.275
t(8.124)=2.888
t(12.80)=0.8708
t(9.737)=2.883
t(6.820)=3.953
t(10.57)=2.719
t(11.50)=0.08492
t(12.97)=2.818
t(12.04)=2.272
t(6.394)=4.087
t(12.24)=2.930
t(8.840)=1.079

**0.0082
**0.0044

0.6843
***0.0009
*0.0191
**0.0074
**0.0045

0.0658
**0.0024
**0.0069
**0.0096
*0.0199

0.3999
*0.0167
**0.0058
*0.0206

0.9338
*0.0145
*0.0422
**0.0056
*0.0124

0.3090

3-OH-KYN/KYN  ratios  increased  in  the  CKD  group, 
reflecting  the  activity  of  IDO/TDO  and  kynurenine 
3-monooxygenase (KMO), respectively.

Following 5/6 nephrectomy, the animals spent 
more time in the arms of the EPM, but the number 
of entries decreased

In the EPM test, the Mann-Whitney test revealed a signifi-
cant reduction in the total number of entries into the arms 

1 3186 

Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196

(Fig. 2a;  MdnSHAM=5,  MdnCKD=3, U=26.5, p=0.0182), but 
the nephrectomized rats still spent more time in the arms of 
the maze (Fig. 2b;  MdnSHAM=263,  MdnCKD=276, U=28, 
p=0.0344) and less time in the center (Fig. 2c;  MdnSHAM=37, 
 MdnCKD=24, U=28, p=0.0344) than the sham-operated group. 
Considering the time spent in each arm, there was a signifi-
cant increase in the closed arm time (Fig. 2e,  MdnSHAM=259, 
 MdnCKD=274, U=23.5, p=0.0135) and no significant differ-
ence was detected in the open arm time (Fig. 2d,  MdnSHAM=0, 
 MdnCKD=0,  U=44,  p=0.2337).  There  was  no  significant 
difference  in  the  number  of  entries  into  the  open  arms 
 (MdnSHAM=0,  MdnCKD=0, U=45.5, p=0.3473) or the closed 
arms  (MdnSHAM=4,  MdnCKD=3, U=33, p=0.0713).

Following 5/6 nephrectomy, central locomotion, 
and rearing decreased in the OF test

In the OF test, neither the total distance covered in the OF arena 
(Fig. 3a; MSHAM =1544, MCKD=1293, t(19)=1.549, p=0.1380) 
nor the time spent with locomotion (Fig. 3b; MSHAM =128.9, 
MCKD  =118.3,  t(19)=0.9236,  p=0.3673)  was  significantly 
affected by the induction of CKD. Likewise, no significant dif-
ference could be seen in the time spent immobile (Fig. 3c; MSHAM 
=22.94, MCKD =42.13, t(19)=1.532, p=0.1419). There was a 
significant reduction in the number of rearings in the CKD group 
(Fig. 3d; MSHAM =36.44, MCKD =19.00, t(19)=3.502, p=0.0024), 
which affected both the unsupported (Fig. 3e; MSHAM =2.778, 
MCKD =1.00, t(19)=2.170, p=0.0429) and the supported rearing 
activity (Fig. 3f; MSHAM =33.56, MCKD =18.00, t(19)=3.301, 
p=0.0038). Moreover, the nephrectomized group covered a sig-
nificantly shorter distance in the central zone of the arena com-
pared to the sham-operated animals (Fig. 3g; MSHAM =93.78, 
MCKD =38.85, t(19)=2.139, p=0.0456), and they also spent less 
time in the central zone (Fig. 3h; MSHAM =7.944, MCKD =3.125, 
t(19)=2.380, p=0.0280).

The number and time of interactions with marbles 
in the MB test decreased in CKD

In the MB test, Welch’s t-test could not detect any signifi-
cant difference in the number of buried marbles (>50% cov-
ered with bedding material) between the groups (Fig. 4a, 
MSHAM =2.857, MCKD =1.5, t(10.23)=1.295, p=0.2239). 
Interestingly,  the  CKD  group  interacted  with  the  mar-
bles fewer times (Fig. 4b, MSHAM =7.286, MCKD =3.167, 
t(10.68)=2.476,  p=0.0313)  and  for  a  shorter  amount  of 
time (Fig. 4c, MSHAM =55.5, MCKD =8.115, t(7.168)=3.914, 
p=0.0055) than the sham-operated rats.

Crh, Crhr1, and Crhr2 were upregulated 
in the amygdala following 5/6 nephrectomy

The expression of each gene was calculated compared to 
Gapdh  expression  and  analyzed  using  the  Mann-Whit-
ney test. As seen in Fig. 5, the mRNA expression of Crh 
 (MdnSHAM=1,   MdnCKD=2.065,  U=7,  p=0.0090),  Crhr1 
 (Mdn SHAM=1,   Mdn CKD=1.390,  U=0,  p=0.0002),  and 
Crhr2  (MdnSHAM=1,  MdnCKD=1.429, U=0, p=0.0079) in 
the amygdala was significantly higher in the CKD group 
than in the sham-operated group, whereas Avp expression 
 (MdnSHAM=1,  MdnCKD=0.47, U=16, p=0.1462) was not 
affected significantly by the 5/6 nephrectomy.

There was no significant alteration in protein 
expression in the amygdala

In  the  amygdala  (Fig.  6),  no  significant  difference 
was  found  in  the  protein  expression  of  CRH  (M SHAM 
=0.4747,  MCKD  =0.4413, t(17.23)=1.251,  p=0.2276), 
CRHR1 (MSHAM =0.3417, MCKD =0.3379, t(22)=0.2684, 
p=0.7909) and CRHR2 (MSHAM=0.5737, MCKD =0.5503, 

Fig. 2   EPM test results: a total number of entries into the arms; b total time spent in the arms of the maze; c time spent in the center of the 
maze; d time spent in the open arms; e time spent in the closed arms; mean+SD, n=11; *p<0.05 vs sham

1 3Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196 

187

Fig. 3   Computerized OF test results: a total distance covered, b total 
time  of  ambulation,  c  total  time  spent  immobile,  d  number  of  rear-
ings; mean+SD; e number of unsupported rearings, f number of sup-

ported rearings, g distance covered in the central zone, h time spent 
in the central zone; n=9–12; *p<0.05 vs sham; **p<0.01 vs sham

Fig. 4   MB  test  results  a  number  of  buried  marbles,  b  number  of  interactions  with  marbles,  c  time  spent  with  marbles;  mean+SEM;  n=6–7; 
*p<0.05 vs sham

1 3188 

Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196

Fig. 5   Relative gene expression 
in the amygdala; mean+SD; 
n=5–8; **p<0.01 vs sham; 
***p<0.001 vs sham

t(17.23)=1.302, p=0.2070) between the sham-operated 
and CKD groups. The expression of CRH was determined 
using β-actin as a loading background, whereas GAPDH 
was employed for the analysis of CRHR1 and CRHR2 
expression. Pictures of the original, uncropped gels are 
included in the Supplement (Figs. S2-4).

Discussion

Subtotal (5/6) nephrectomy is a widely used, reliable model 
of CKD in rodents. It mimics the mechanism of CKD sec-
ondary to nephron loss in humans, characterized by progres-
sive glomerulosclerosis and tubulointerstitial fibrosis [91]. 
Subtotal nephrectomy can be performed by either ligation 
of the polar branches of the renal artery (ligation model) 
or by excision of the poles (ablation model), followed by 
contralateral nephrectomy. Although the ligation model is 

associated with more severe hypertension and proteinuria 
[4], the extent of resulting nephron loss is fairly unpredict-
able, causing a significant variation in the severity of CKD. 
However, the ablation model seems to be more reproduc-
ible with satisfactory inter-individual variation [52]; thus, 
we chose this method for CKD induction.

To confirm the development of CKD, urine creatinine 
and protein levels, as well as serum carbamide, creatinine, 
lipid, and ion levels, were measured 8 and 9 weeks after 
nephrectomy,  respectively.  Furthermore,  the  eGFR  and 
urine protein/creatinine ratio were calculated. The signifi-
cant increase in serum carbamide and creatinine levels, as 
well as the decrease in eGFR confirm the deterioration of 
renal function in the nephrectomized animals. Additionally, 
we found that the urine protein/creatinine ratio increased 
in the CKD group, which indicates damage to the filtration 
barrier [90]. Based on the study of Ormrod and Miller, the 

Fig. 6   Protein expression in the 
amygdala; mean+SD; n=11–12

1 3Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196 

189

average serum creatinine level of 19.98 μmol/L corresponds 
to a moderate level of uremia [61].

Results of the blood test and urine analysis underline the 
presence of CKD since we detected a significant elevation of 
serum potassium and phosphate as well as calcium and mag-
nesium. Potassium and phosphate retention are well-known 
consequences of CKD [32, 87], whereas the elevation of 
serum calcium concentration could result from the develop-
ment of secondary hyperparathyroidism. In fact, secondary 
hyperparathyroidism is known to develop from stage 2 CKD 
in humans, and a four-fold increase in parathyroid hormone 
(PTH) level can be observed when end-stage kidney dis-
ease develops [20]. Besides, the excretion of magnesium 
decreases with the advancement of CKD, typically causing 
hypermagnesemia from stage 4 [58]. Thus, the increase in 
magnesium concentration might be also due to the impaired 
renal excretion in the CKD group.

Considering the controversial results available in the lit-
erature on the effect of CKD on anxiety-related behavior, 
first, we conducted a battery of behavioral tests, known to be 
sensitive for detecting anxiety-related behaviors. The EPM 
test is probably the most frequently used behavioral test for 
the assessment of anxiety-like behavior in rodents [85]. It 
is an ethologically based, the so-called approach-avoidance 
test, based on the innate conflict between the rodents’ drive 
to explore the novel environment and their fear of exposed 
areas [11]. The time spent in the open arms and the number 
of entries into the open arms negatively correlate with anx-
iety-like behavior [21]. In our study, the CKD group spent 
less time in the central area and more time in the closed arms 
of the EPM than the sham-operated animals. The data on the 
ambulatory activity of the animals is somewhat contradic-
tory since nephrectomy seems to induce a decrease in the 
total entries into arms, whereas it increases the total time 
spent in arms. Nevertheless, taking these results together 
with  that  of  the  OF  experiments,  we  conclude  that  it  is 
unlikely that 5/6 nephrectomy affects locomotor activity. 
Therefore, the increased closed-arm time indicates an avoid-
ance of open arms, which is a sign of anxiety-like behavior 
[82]. It should be noted, however, that no significant differ-
ence was detected in the open-arm entries and open-arm 
time, so the results should be interpreted with caution.

Since its development in 1934 as a test for the assess-
ment of emotionality in rodents, the OF test has become a 
widely used model in preclinical tests of anxiolytic drugs. 
In this ethologically based test, the anxious animals tend 
to exhibit wall-hugging behavior (thigmotaxis), avoiding 
the central part of the apparatus [64]. Nine weeks after the 
nephrectomy, a significant decrease in the time spent in the 
central zone and the distance covered in the central zone 
was observed in the CKD group, which can be interpreted as 
anxiety-like behavior. Furthermore, the CKD group exhib-
ited a decrease in rearing behavior, affecting the number of 

supported and unsupported rearings equally. Rearing—i.e., 
temporarily standing on the hind legs—is generally consid-
ered an exploratory behavior [75]. However, its relation to 
anxiety is rather controversial, as some studies have associ-
ated increased anxiety with increased rearing [6, 30], while 
others have found an increase in rearing after treatment with 
anxiolytic drugs [18, 26]. Recent studies have suggested that 
only unsupported rears (without leaning to a wall) correlate 
with emotionality in rodents [75] and can be considered a 
hippocampus-related exploratory behavior [50]. In addition, 
an increased tendency in the immobility time was observed 
in the CKD group suggesting freezing behavior characteris-
tic of anxiety. In our study, there was no change in ambula-
tion time and ambulation distance, so the total ambulatory 
activity was not affected by the nephrectomy. Therefore, the 
reduction in rearing could more likely be attributed to the 
suppression of exploratory behavior, which is common in 
anxiety-provoking, aversive circumstances [75].

Overall, our results suggest that CKD indeed induces 
anxiety-like behavior. This is in accordance with the study 
of Chandanathil et al., who reported a decrease in peripheral 
square crossings and in the number of rearings both four and 
eight weeks after nephrectomy in rats [13]. Another group 
has also observed a lower number of square crossings in the 
OF test in moderate CKD, as well as a reduction in rearing 
activity in severe CKD, 1 month after nephrectomy [79]. In 
a recent study, anxiety-like behavior has been observed in 
the EPM, light-dark box, and tail suspension tests in CKD 
induced by an adenine-rich diet in mice [33].

In contrast with our observations, Tóthova et al. have not 
found any significant behavioral alteration in rats 3 months 
after  5/6  nephrectomy.  Nine  months  after  nephrectomy, 
however, the animals spent more time in the light compart-
ment of the light-dark box, which suggests an anxiolytic-
like effect, although the reduction of anxiety-like behavior 
was not confirmed by the OF test [80]. It should be noted, 
that most studies reported anxiety-like behavior 4-8 weeks 
after nephrectomy [13, 79], and in the study of Chandan-
athil et al., the reduction in exploratory behavior was no 
longer significant 12 and 16 weeks after nephrectomy [13]. 
In a murine model of CKD, anxiolytic-like behavior was 
reported 4 and 10 weeks after induction: the time spent 
in the light compartment of the light-dark box increased, 
whereas the closed arm time in the EPM test decreased. 
However, the reduction in closed-arm time could result from 
the robust increase in time spent at the central intersection of 
the arms, rather than from the avoidance of open arms [16]. 
This study has also employed a different CKD model (corti-
cal electrocautery and nephrectomy) and a different species, 
which might account for some of these discrepancies.

To  obtain  a  more  comprehensive  behavioral  profile 
an MB test was also performed. To our knowledge, MB 
behavior has not yet been assessed in rodent CKD models. 

1 3190 

Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196

Burying behavior, i.e., the displacement of bedding material 
using the snout and forepaws in a concerted effort to cover 
a harmful or non-harmful object, is part of the rodents’ nor-
mal behavioral repertoire [8]. The MB test was originally 
devised to measure defensive burying as a sign of novelty-
induced anxiety, but nowadays, it is frequently used as an 
assay of perseverative, compulsive-like behavior, as well 
[78]. Seven weeks after nephrectomy, no difference was 
found in the number of buried marbles between the groups. 
When considering the goal-oriented interactions with mar-
bles, however, a significant reduction in their duration and 
number was observed in the CKD group. As the general 
locomotor activity did not seem to be affected in the OF 
and EPM, our MB results may correlate with a reduction in 
explorative behavior.

Considering our findings of an anxiety-inducing effect of 5/6 
nephrectomy after 7 weeks, we aimed to investigate the possible 
mechanism of action via assessing the presence of uremic tox-
ins associated with anxiety as well as analyzing HPA axis activ-
ity including amygdalar expression of key anxiogenic genes.

Uremic toxins might mediate anxiety-like behavior in our 
study, as they have been implicated in the neuropsychiatric 
complications of CKD by several groups. In CKD patients, 
serum indole-3-acetic acid concentration has correlated with 
anxiety, depression, and the quality of sleep [39]. In rodent 
models of CKD, both pCS [77] and IS have been linked 
to anxiety-like behavior [38, 76]. In fact, Karbowska et al. 
found that a high dose of IS (200 mg/kg) administered to 
intact rats caused an increase in stress sensitivity [38]. These 
data indicate that, indeed, uremic toxins can be in the back-
ground of CKD-induced anxiety.

IS has also reduced brain serotonin, dopamine, and nor-
epinephrine levels in rats [38]. The robust increase in the 
concentration of both IS and pCS in our study detected 
at week 9 could cause the reduced exploration indirectly 
by decreasing the cerebral monoamine concentrations. In 
point of fact, fluvoxamine (a selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor) and bupropion (an atypical antidepressant) have 
increased exploration around the marbles in the MB test in 
mice [29]. Furthermore, these gut bacteria-derived, protein-
bound uremic toxins (IS and pCS) have a well-established 
proinflammatory effect [83], which in turn has been impli-
cated in the development of anxiety [19].

Recently, Huang et al. have also pointed to the involve-
ment of high serum urea levels in the development of CKD-
related anxiety. In their study, the severity of anxiety-related 
behavior has correlated with serum urea concentration in a 
mouse model of CKD. Moreover, urea transporter B KO 
mice have shown an increase in anxiety-like behavior, com-
pared to WT mice, which could indicate the anxiogenic 
effect of urea per se [33]. In our study, the urea concentra-
tion has risen robustly in the CKD group; therefore, it could 
also contribute to the development of anxiety.

Furthermore, in our experiments, the metabolism of tryp-
tophan has shifted from the indole and serotonin pathways 
to the kynurenine pathway (see Fig. 7). In CKD, multiple 
studies have reported an increase in KYN metabolites [7, 
88], behind of which is most likely chronic inflammation, 
as inflammatory cytokines (such as IFN-γ, TNF-α) activate 
IDO, the rate-limiting enzyme of KYN synthesis [95]. KYN 
metabolites play a controversial role in the pathomecha-
nism of CKD, as some of them seem to have a detrimental 
effect, whereas others might be considered protective [56]. 
For instance, 3-OH-KYN has been associated with mito-
chondrial dysfunction and increased ROS production [66], 
but it has been reported that KYNA has anti-inflammatory 
properties and it prevents homocysteine-induced damage 
to the endothelium [3, 89]. Our results showed an increase 
in the KYN/Trp ratio indicating an activation of IDO and/
or TDO, which is in accordance with previous results [37, 
62]. TDOs are mainly localized in the liver and can be acti-
vated in response to glucocorticoids. However, most of the 
kynurenine synthesis in inflammatory diseases is extrahe-
patic, as cytokines activate IDOs in the central nervous sys-
tem, blood, spleen, kidneys, and lungs [42]. In our study, 
there was a robust increase in the 3-OH-KYN/KYN ratio, 
pointing to the activation of KMO. In the presence of KMO, 
neurotoxic and excitatory products of KYN are synthesized, 
including 3-OH-KYN and QA that have been associated 
with free radical production and excitotoxicity, respectively 
[15]. In comparison, we observed a less pronounced increase 
in KYNA synthesis. These results suggest that CKD induced 
an imbalance between the neuroprotective KYNA and the 
abovementioned neurotoxic products [34]. In fact, KYN and 
QA are not only neurotoxic but they have also been asso-
ciated with anxiety in preclinical and clinical studies [48, 
60], as opposed to the anxiolytic role of KYNA [47]. The 
predominance of anxiogenic mediators is further amplified 
by 5-HT deficiency due to the shift of Trp metabolism to the 
KYN pathway in inflammation, which further increases the 
sensitivity to anxiety [42].

Since HPA axis dysregulation has previously been impli-
cated in CKD, we investigated on one hand if indeed the 
endocrine HPA axis activity is altered and on the other hand 
if the expression of CRH and its receptors is influenced by 
our CKD model.

As an indicator of the endocrine HPA axis, we measured 
the plasma corticosterone 8 weeks after CKD induction. Our 
results showed that in our model CKD did not alter plasma 
corticosterone concentration. These results are in line with 
the findings of Lu et al., in which plasma corticosterone has 
not changed in either male or female rats 7 weeks after 5/6 
nephrectomy [53]. Another study has investigated plasma 
ACTH and corticosterone levels at multiple time points fol-
lowing 5/6 nephrectomy in rats, and the increase in cor-
ticosterone has only become significant 90 days after the 

1 3Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196 

191

Fig. 7   Overview  of  the  alterations  in  the  plasma  concentration  of 
tryptophan metabolites following 5/6 nephrectomy. The arrows indi-
cate significant changes compared to the sham-operated group. 3-OH-
AA: 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid; 3-OH-KYN: 3-hydroxykynurenine;5-
HIAA:  5-hydroxyindole-3-acetic  acid;  5-HT:  serotonin;  5-HTP: 
5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan;  AA:  anthranilic  acid;  CIA:  cinnabaric 
acid; IAA: indoleacetic acid; IDO-1,2: indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase; 

INMT:  indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase;  KAT:  kynurenine  ami-
notransferase;  KMO:  kynurenine  3-monooxygenase;  KYN:  kynure-
nine; KYNA: kynurenic acid; MAO-A: monoamine oxidase A; ME: 
melatonin;  Me-5-HT:  methylserotonin;  PA:  picolinic  acid;  QA:  qui-
nolinic acid; QAA: quinaldic acid; TDO: tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase 
;  TPA:  tryptamine;  TPH:  tryptophan  hydroxylase;  XA:  xanthurenic 
acid

nephrectomy [31]. Based on these data, it is possible that 
our sample collection happened too soon for a significant 
elevation in plasma corticosterone to develop.

CRH is expressed in a variety of anxiety-related extrahy-
pothalamic sites of the central nervous system, including 
the central amygdala (CeA) [44]. In our gene expression 
analysis, significant upregulations of Crh, Crhr1, and Crhr2 
were observed in the amygdala in the CKD group, which is 
in accordance with the development of anxiety-like behavior. 
In a study by Cipriano et al., the intra-amygdalar administra-
tion of CRH resulted in a reduction in open arm time and 
entries in the EPM test, while a selective CRHR1 antagonist 
induced an anxiety-like effect, pointing to the involvement 
of amygdalar CRHR1 signaling in anxiety [17]. Moreover, 
the continuous overexpression of CRH by a lentiviral vector 
in the central nucleus of the amygdala has been associated 
with the dysregulation of the HPA axis, increased acoustic 
startle response, as well as depressive-like behavior [40]. 
Crhr2 upregulation can also be linked to anxiety, as uro-
cortin 2 (a CRHR2 agonist) induced anxiety-like behavior, 
when injected into the medial amygdala in rats [1].

Contrary to the gene expression results, no significant dif-
ferences were detected in the amygdalar protein expression 
of CRH and its receptors. The difference between mRNA 
and protein expression results might be  due  to multiple 
reasons.

Firstly, it is possible that an increase in transcription 
might not manifest in increased translation. It is well known 
that gene expression is regulated at multiple levels: tran-
scription, mRNA processing, transport, and degradation 
as well as protein translation and degradation. Therefore, 
protein levels vary on a high dynamic range [73]. The rate 
of  translation  is  regulated  by  a  multitude  of  molecular 

mechanisms, transcription is only one of them. Addition-
ally,  the  activity  of  eukaryotic  initiating  factors  (EIFs), 
structural features (e.g., internal ribosome-entry sequences, 
upstream open reading frames, and secondary or tertiary 
RNA structures), RNA-binding proteins, as well as microR-
NAs and small interfering RNAs are involved in the regula-
tion of translation [25]. Any of these mechanisms might be 
responsible for our results; therefore, it is possible that the 
increased expression of the Crh, Crhr1, and Crhr2 genes, 
that we detected in the amygdala, does not reflect in their 
protein concentration.

Secondly, it is also possible that the HPA axis dysregula-
tion has not yet developed in our model, or it just started to 
develop at the time of sample collection, and later a signifi-
cant change could have been detected. Indeed, the corticos-
terone concentration was not elevated either at the time of 
sample collection, supporting the idea that HPA axis dys-
regulation has not developed yet. In fact, Hirotsu et al. found 
that ACTH and corticosterone levels fluctuate during the 
course of CKD. Corticosterone showed an elevation after 
90 days of CKD induction, then dramatically decreased and 
started to rise again after 150 days [31]. It is possible that 
during the course of CKD, anxiety develops as a result of 
an interplay between multiple CKD-induced adverse effects 
(e.g., uremic toxins [38, 77], urea [33], oxidative stress [36], 
HPA axis dysregulation [31]) that at different time points 
contribute to anxiety to varying degree.

Overall, we can conclude that the altered CRH signaling 
is probably not involved in the development of CKD-induced 
anxiety at the time when sample collection was done in our 
study. Nevertheless, further studies are needed to establish 
the exact role of the HPA axis in anxiety during the course 
of CKD.

1 3192 

Conclusion

Based on our results 5/6 nephrectomy, indeed evokes anx-
iety-like behavior 7 weeks after surgery in Wistar rats. 5/6 
nephrectomy induced moderate CKD suggested by the labo-
ratory and urinalysis results. In our study, IS and pCS lev-
els have risen in the CKD group, both of which have been 
previously implicated in anxiety. 5/6 nephrectomy caused a 
shift in tryptophan metabolism toward the kynurenine path-
way, consequently accumulating anxiogenic and neurotoxic 
metabolites, such as KYN and QA. We also investigated if the 
dysregulation of the HPA axis might play a role in anxiety-like 
behavior in CKD. Our results showed no significant elevation 
in corticosterone concentration, suggesting that the HPA axis 
is not involved in anxiety in our CKD model, at least not at 
this time point. Still, some changes in gene expression were 
detected in the CRH system in the amygdala, but these were 
not detectable on the protein level. Based on these findings, 
the anxiety-like behavior at this time point in CKD progres-
sion is more likely to be mediated by uremic toxins and the 
shift in tryptophan metabolism than the dysregulation of the 
HPA axis. It is noteworthy to mention that other mechanisms 
(such as inflammation and oxidative stress) might also con-
tribute; however, these were not explored in our study.

Supplementary Information  The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00424- 023- 02884-y.

Acknowledgements  We thank Ilona Ungi and Gusztáv Kiss for the 
excellent technical support during the operations.

Author contribution  Márta Sárközy and Krisztina Csabafi planned 
the study concept. Merse Kis, Fanni Márványkövi, and Zsuzsanna Z. 
A. Kovács performed the operations. Andrea Siska and Imre Földesi 
measured urine and serum urea, creatinine, and electrolyte concentra-
tions. István Szatmári and Péter Simon synthesized pCS for UHPLC-
MS/MS. Zsolt Galla and Péter Monostori measured serum metabolites 
using UHPLC-MS/MS. Éva Bodnár, Krisztina Csabafi, and Katalin 
Eszter Ibos performed the behavioral tests and analyzed gene expres-
sion. Hoa Dinh and Merse Kiss performed protein expression studies 
using Western blot. Katalin Eszter Ibos wrote the manuscript under the 
supervision of Krisztina Csabafi. Krisztina Csabafi and Márta Sárközy 
consulted, proofread, and edited the manuscript.

Funding  Open access funding provided by University of Szeged. The 
work and publication were supported by the projects EFOP-3.6.2-16-
2017-00006 (LIVE LONGER), GINOP-2.3.2-15-2016-00040, and 
FK129094. M. Sarkozy was supported by the János Bolyai Research 
Scholarship of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences (2023-26). F. 
Márványkövi was supported by the Szeged Scientists Academy Pro-
gram. The Szeged Scientists Academy Program of the Foundation for 
the Future of Biomedical Sciences in Szeged is implemented with the 
support of the Ministry of Human Resources (TSZ: 34232-3/2016/
INTFIN).

Data availability  Datasets generated and analyzed, and the supplemen-
tal material for this study are available in the Mendeley Data reposi-
tory at doi: 10.17632/gg2nrgfnzb.1; https:// data. mende ley. com/ datas  
ets/ gg2nr gfnzb/ draft?a= 91893 794- 72f9- 4804- 8f73- a80c5 a429c 90.

Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196

Declarations 

This investigation conformed to the EU Directive 2010/63/EU. The 
animals were kept and handled during the experiments in accordance 
with the instructions of the University of Szeged Ethical Committee for 
the Protection of Animals in Research, which approved these experi-
ments (XV./799/2019).

Competing interests  The authors declare no competing interests.

Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References

  1.  Alves SWE, Portela NC, Silva MS, Céspedes IC, Bittencourt JC, 
Viana MB (2016) The activation and blockage of CRF type 2 
receptors of the medial amygdala alter elevated T-maze inhibi-
tory avoidance, an anxiety-related response. Behav Brain Res 
305:191–197. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. bbr. 2016. 03. 013

  2.  Anothaisintawee T, Rattanasiri S, Ingsathit A, Attia J, Thakkin-
stian A (2009) Prevalence of chronic kidney disease: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Clin Nephrol 71:244–254

  3.  Badawy AAB (2018) Hypothesis kynurenic and quinolinic acids: 
the main players of the kynurenine pathway and opponents in 
inflammatory disease. Med Hypotheses 118:129–138. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/j. mehy. 2018. 06. 021

  4.  Becker GJ, Hewitson TD (2013) Animal models of chronic kidney 
disease: useful but not perfect. Nephrol Dial Transplant 28:2432–
2438. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ ndt/ gft071

  5.  Besseling PJ, Pieters TT, Nguyen ITN, de Bree PM, Willekes N, Dijk AH, 
Bovée DM, Hoorn EJ, Rookmaaker MB, Gerritsen KG, Verhaar MC, 
Gremmels H, Joles JA (2021) A plasma creatinine- and urea-based 
equation to estimate glomerular filtration rate in rats. Am J Physiol 
Renal Physiol 320:F518–F524. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1152/ ajpre nal. 00656. 
2020

  6.  Borta A, Schwarting RKW (2005) Inhibitory avoidance, pain reac-
tivity, and plus-maze behavior in Wistar rats with high versus 
low rearing activity. Physiol Behav 84:387–396. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/j. physb eh. 2005. 01. 009

  7.  Brekdar F, Khayat MI, Zrieki A (2022) Plasma kynurenine: a 
promising marker for the assessment of renal functions. Int J 
Tryptophan Res 15. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 11786 46922 11020 93
  8.  de Brouwer G, Fick A, Harvey BH, Wolmarans DW (2019) A 
critical inquiry into marble-burying as a preclinical screening 
paradigm of relevance for anxiety and obsessive–compulsive dis-
order: mapping the way forward. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci 
19:1–39. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3758/ s13415- 018- 00653-4

  9.  de Brouwer G, Wolmarans DW (2018) Back to basics: a methodo-
logical perspective on marble-burying behavior as a screening test 
for psychiatric illness. Behav Processes 157:590–600. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/j. beproc. 2018. 04. 011

1 3Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196 

193

 10.  Brydges CR, Fiehn O, Mayberg HS, Schreiber H, Dehkordi SM, 
Bhattacharyya S, Cha J, Choi KS, Craighead WE, Krishnan RR, 
Rush AJ, Dunlop BW, Kaddurah-Daouk R, Penninx B, Binder 
E, Kastenmüller G, Arnold M, Nevado-Helgado A, Blach C et al 
(2021) Indoxyl sulfate, a gut microbiome-derived uremic toxin, 
is associated with psychic anxiety and its functional magnetic 
resonance imaging-based neurologic signature. Sci Rep 11:1–14. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41598- 021- 99845-1

 11.  Calhoon GG, Tye KM (2015) Resolving the neural circuits of anxi-
ety. Nat Neurosci 18:1394–1404. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nn. 4101
 12.  Cardoso EMDL, Arregger AL, Budd D, Zucchini AE, Contreras 
LN (2016) Dynamics of salivary cortisol in chronic kidney disease 
patients at stages 1 through 4. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 85:313–319. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ cen. 13023

 13.  Chandanathil MI, Upadhya S, Upadhya S, Bhat G (2015) Psy-
chomotor functions at various weeks of chronic renal failure 
in  rats.  Cogn  Neurodyn  9:201–211.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s11571- 014- 9315-z

 14.  Chen HJ, Wang YF, Qi R, Schoepf UJ, Varga-Szemes A, Ball BD, 
Zhang Z, Kong X, Wen J, Li X, Lu GM, Zhang LJ (2017) Altered 
amygdala resting-state functional connectivity in maintenance 
hemodialysis end-stage renal disease patients with depressive 
mood. Mol Neurobiol 54:2223–2233. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s12035- 016- 9811-8

 15.  Chen Y, Zhang J, Yang Y, Xiang K, Li H, Sun D, Chen L (2022) 
Kynurenine-3-monooxygenase (KMO): from its biological func-
tions to therapeutic effect in diseases progression. J Cell Physiol 
237:4339–4355. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ jcp. 30876

 16.  Chillon JM, Brazier F, Bouquet P, Massy ZA (2013) Neurologi-
cal disorders in a murine model of chronic renal failure. Toxins 
6:180–193. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ toxin s6010 180

 17.  Cipriano AC, Gomes KS, Nunes-de-Souza RL (2016) CRF recep-
tor type 1 (but not type 2) located within the amygdala plays a role 
in the modulation of anxiety in mice exposed to the elevated plus 
maze. Horm Behav 81:59–67. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. yhbeh.  
2016. 03. 002

 18.  Costall B, Jones BJ, Kelly ME, Naylor RJ, Tomkins DM (1989) 
Exploration of mice in a black and white test box: validation as a 
model of anxiety. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 32:777–785. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0091- 3057(89) 90033-6

 19.  Felger JC (2017) Imaging the role of inflammation in mood and 
anxiety-related disorders. Curr Neuropharmacol 15:533–558. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 2174/ 15701 59X15 66617 11232 01142

 20.  Felsenfeld AJ, Levine BS, Rodriguez M (2015) Pathophysiology 
of calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium dysregulation in chronic 
kidney disease. Semin Dial 28:564–577. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 
sdi. 12411

 21.  File SE, Lippa AS, Beer B, Lippa MT (2005) Animal tests of 
anxiety. In: Current Protocols in Pharmacology. John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA, pp 241–251

 22.  Freiwan M, Kovács MG, Kovács ZZA, Szűcs G, Dinh H, Losonczi 
R, Siska A, Kriston A, Kovács F, Horváth P, Földesi I, Cserni G, 
Dux L, Csont T, Sárközy M (2022) Investigation of the antiremod-
eling effects of losartan, mirabegron and their combination on the 
development of doxorubicin-induced chronic cardiotoxicity in a 
rat model. Int J Mol Sci 23. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ ijms2 30422 01
 23.  Galla Z, Rácz G, Grecsó N, Baráth Á, Kósa M, Bereczki C, Mon-
ostori P (2021) Improved LC-MS/MS method for the determina-
tion of 42 neurologically and metabolically important molecules 
in urine. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci:1179. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jchro mb. 2021. 122846

 24.  Galla Z, Rajda C, Rácz G, Grecsó N, Baráth Á, Vécsei L, Berec-
zki C, Monostori P (2021) Simultaneous determination of 30 
neurologically and metabolically important molecules: a sen-
sitive and selective way to measure tyrosine and tryptophan 
pathway metabolites and other biomarkers in human serum and 

cerebrospinal fluid. J Chromatogr A:1635. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1016/j. chroma. 2020. 461775

 25.  Gebauer F, Hentze MW (2004) Molecular mechanisms of trans-
lational control. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 5:827–835. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1038/ nrm14 88

 26.  Gentsch C, Lichtsteiner M, Feer H (1987) Open field and ele-
vated plus-maze: a behavioural comparison between spontane-
ously hypertensive (SHR) and Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats and 
the effects of chlordiazepoxide. Behav Brain Res 25:101–107. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0166- 4328(87) 90003-9

 27.  Goh ZS, Griva K (2018) Anxiety and depression in patients with 
end-stage renal disease: impact and management challenges–a 
narrative review. Int J Nephrol Renov Dis 11:93–102. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 2147/ IJNRD. S1266 15

 28.  Gupta J, Mitra N, Kanetsky PA, Devaney J, Wing MR, Reilly M, 
Shah VO, Balakrishnan VS, Guzman NJ, Girndt M, Periera BG, 
Feldman HI, Kusek JW, Joffe MM, Raj DS, Study C, Luther M 
(2012) Association between albuminuria, kidney function, and 
inflammatory biomarker profile in CKD in CRIC. Clin J Am Soc 
Nephrol 7:1938–1946. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2215/ CJN. 03500 412

 29.  Hayashi E, Kuratani K, Kinoshita M, Hara H (2010) Pharmaco-
logically distinctive behaviors other than burying marbles dur-
ing the marble burying test in mice. Pharmacology 86:293–296. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1159/ 00032 1190

 30.  Heredia L, Torrente M, Colomina MT, Domingo JL (2014) 
Assessing anxiety in C57BL/6J mice: a pharmacological char-
acterization of the open-field and light/dark tests. J Pharmacol 
Toxicol Methods 69:108–114. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. vascn.  
2013. 12. 005

 31.  Hirotsu C, Tufik S, Bergamaschi CT, Tenorio NM, Araujo P, 
Andersen ML (2010) Sleep pattern in an experimental model of 
chronic kidney disease. Am J Physiol-Ren Physiol 299:F1379–
F1388. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1152/ ajpre nal. 00118. 2010

 32.  Hruska KA, Sugatani T, Agapova O, Fang Y (2017) The chronic 
kidney disease – mineral bone disorder (CKD-MBD): advances 
in pathophysiology. Bone 100:80–86. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j.  
bone. 2017. 01. 023

 33.  Huang B, Huang Z, Wang H, Zhu G, Liao H, Wang Z, Yang B, 
Ran J (2023) High urea induces anxiety disorders associated 
with chronic kidney disease by promoting abnormal prolifera-
tion of OPC in amygdala. Eur J Pharmacol 957:175905. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ejphar. 2023. 175905

 34.  Hughes TD, Güner OF, Iradukunda EC, Phillips RS, Bowen JP 
(2022) The kynurenine pathway and kynurenine 3-monooxy-
genase inhibitors. Molecules 27. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ molec  
ules2 70102 73

 35.  Jin K, Hyun D, Kyeong E, Woo C (2013) Oxidative stress induces 
inactivation of protein phosphatase 2A, promoting proin fl amma-
tory NF-κ B in aged rat kidney. Free Radic Biol Med 61:206–217. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. freer adbio med. 2013. 04. 005

 36.  Jing W, Jabbari B, Vaziri ND (2018) Uremia induces upregulation 
of cerebral tissue oxidative/inflammatory cascade, down-regula-
tion of nrf2 pathway and disruption of blood brain barrier. Am J 
Transl Res 10:2137–2147

 37.  Kalaska B, Pawlak K, Domaniewski T, Oksztulska-Kolanek E, 
Znorko B, Roszczenko A, Rogalska J, Brzoska MM, Lipowicz 
P, Doroszko M, Pryczynicz A, Pawlak D (2017) Elevated lev-
els of peripheral kynurenine decrease bone strength in rats with 
chronic kidney disease. Front Physiol 8:836. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
3389/ fphys. 2017. 00836

 38.  Karbowska M, Hermanowicz JM, Tankiewicz-Kwedlo A, Kalaska 
B, Kaminski TW, Nosek K, Wisniewska RJ, Pawlak D (2020) 
Neurobehavioral effects of uremic toxin–indoxyl sulfate in the rat 
model. Sci Rep 10. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41598- 020- 66421-y
 39.  Karu N, McKercher C, Nichols DS, Davies N, Shellie RA, Hilder 
EF,  Jose  MD  (2016)  Tryptophan  metabolism,  its  relation  to 

1 3194 

Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196

inflammation and stress markers and association with psycho-
logical and cognitive functioning: Tasmanian Chronic Kidney 
Disease pilot study. BMC Nephrol 17:1–13. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1186/ s12882- 016- 0387-3

 40.  Keen-Rhinehart E, Michopoulos V, Toufexis DJ, Martin EI, Nair 
H, Ressler KJ, Davis M, Owens MJ, Nemeroff CB, Wilson ME 
(2009) Continuous expression of corticotropin-releasing factor in 
the central nucleus of the amygdala emulates the dysregulation of 
the stress and reproductive axes. Mol Psychiatry 14:37–50. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1038/ mp. 2008. 91

 41.  Kielstein H, Suntharalingam M, Perthel R, Song R, Schneider SM, 
Martens-Lobenhoffer J, Jäger K, Bode-Böger SM, Kielstein JT 
(2015) Role of the endogenous nitric oxide inhibitor asymmetric 
dimethylarginine (ADMA) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor 
(BDNF) in depression and behavioural changes: clinical and pre-
clinical data in chronic kidney disease. Nephrol Dial Transplant 
30:1699–1705. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ ndt/ gfv253

 42.  Kim Y-K, Jeon SW (2018) Neuroinflammation and the immune-
kynurenine pathway in anxiety disorders. Curr Neuropharmacol 
16:574–582. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2174/ 15701 59x15 66617 09131 10426
 43.  Kocsis GF, Sárközy M, Bencsik P, Pipicz M, Varga ZV, Pálóczi J, 
Csonka C, Ferdinandy P, Csont T (2012) Preconditioning protects 
the heart in a prolonged uremic condition. Am J Physiol-Heart 
Circ Physiol 303:H1229–H1236. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1152/ ajphe art. 
00379. 2012

 44.  Kovács KJ (2013) CRH: The link between hormonal-, metabolic- 
and behavioral responses to stress. J Chem Neuroanat 54:25–33. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jchem neu. 2013. 05. 003

 45.  Kovács ZZA, Szűcs G, Freiwan M, Kovács MG, Márványkövi 
FM, Dinh H, Siska A, Farkas K, Kovács F, Kriston A, Horváth P, 
Kővári B, Cserni BG, Cserni G, Földesi I, Csont T, Sárközy M 
(2021) Comparison of the antiremodeling effects of losartan and 
mirabegron in a rat model of uremic cardiomyopathy. Sci Rep 11. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41598- 021- 96815-5

 46.  Kovesdy CP (2022) Epidemiology of chronic kidney disease: an 
update 2022. Kidney Int Suppl 12:7–11. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
kisu. 2021. 11. 003

 47.  Lapin IP (1998) Antagonism of kynurenic acid to anxiogens in 
mice. Life Sci 63:PL231–PL236. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0024- 
3205(98) 00404-4

 48.  Lapin IP, Mutovkina LG, Ryzov IV, Mirzaev S (1996) Anxiogenic 
activity of quinolinic acid and kynurenine in the social interaction 
test in mice

 49.  Lee YJ, Kim MS, Cho S, Kim SR (2013) Association of depres-
sion and anxiety with reduced quality of life in patients with predi-
alysis chronic kidney disease. Int J Clin Pract 67:363–368. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1111/ ijcp. 12020

 50.  Lever C, Burton S, O’Keefe J (2006) Rearing on hind legs, envi-
ronmental novelty, and the hippocampal formation. Rev Neurosci 
17:111–133. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1515/ REVNE URO. 2006. 17.1- 2. 111
 51.  Li A, Mu J, Huang M, Zhang Z, Liu J, Zhang M (2018) Altered 
amygdala-related structural covariance and resting-state functional 
connectivity in end-stage renal disease patients. Metab Brain Dis 
33:1471–1481. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11011- 018- 0254-y
 52.  Liu ZC, Chow KM, Chang TMS (2003) Evaluation of two proto-
cols of uremic rat model: partial nephrectomy and infarction. Ren 
Fail 25:935–943. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1081/ JDI- 12002 6028

 53.  Lu  H,  Lei  X,  Klaassen  C  (2006)  Gender  differences  in  renal 
nuclear receptors and aryl hydrocarbon receptor in 5/6 nephrec-
tomized rats. Kidney Int 70:1920–1928. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ 
sj. ki. 50018 80

 54.  Maciel RAP, Rempel LCT, Bosquetti B, Finco AB, Pecoits-Filho 
R, Souza WMD, Stinghen AEM (2016) p-cresol but not p-cresyl 
sulfate stimulate MCP-1 production via NF-κB p65 in human 

vascular smooth muscle cells. J Bras Nefrol 38. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 5935/ 0101- 2800. 20160 024

 55.  Mazumder  MK,  Giri  A,  Kumar  S,  Borah  A  (2016)  A  highly 
reproducible mice model of chronic kidney disease: Evidences 
of behavioural abnormalities and blood-brain barrier disruption. 
Life Sci 161:27–36. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. lfs. 2016. 07. 020
 56.  Mor A, Kalaska B, Pawlak D (2020) Kynurenine pathway in 
chronic kidney disease: what’s old, what’s new, and what’s next? 
Int J Tryptophan Res 13:27–36. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 11786 
46920 954882

 57.  Murtagh FEM, Addington-Hall J, Higginson IJ (2007) The preva-
lence of symptoms in end-stage renal disease: a systematic review. 
Adv Chronic Kidney Dis 14:82–99. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1053/j. ackd. 
2006. 10. 001

 58.  Oliveira B, Cunningham J, Walsh SB (2018) Magnesium balance 
in chronic and end-stage kidney disease. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis 
25:291–295. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1053/j. ackd. 2018. 01. 004

 59.  O’Mahony SM, Clarke G, Borre YE, Dinan TG, Cryan JF (2015) 
Serotonin, tryptophan metabolism and the brain-gut-microbiome 
axis. Behav Brain Res 277:32–48. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. bbr.  
2014. 07. 027

 60.  Orlikov AB, Prakhye IB, Ryzov IV (1994) Kynurenine in blood 
plasma and DST in patients with endogenous anxiety and endog-
enous depression. Biol Psychiatry 36:97–102. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/ 0006- 3223(94) 91189-4

 61.  Ormrod  D,  Miller  T  (1980)  Experimental  uremia.  Nephron 

26:249–254. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1159/ 00018 1994

 62.  Pawlak D, Tankiewicz A, Buczko W (2001) Kynurenine and its 
metabolites in the rat with experimental renal insufficiency. J 
Physiol Pharmacol 52:755–766

 63.  Paxinos G, Watson C (2006) The rat brain in stereotaxic coordi-
nates sixth edition by. Acad Press 170:547612. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/ 0143- 4179(83) 90049-5

 64.  Prut L, Belzung C (2003) The open field as a paradigm to meas-
ure the effects of drugs on anxiety-like behaviors: a review. Eur 
J Pharmacol 463:3–33. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0014- 2999(03)  
01272-X

 65.  Renczés E, Marônek M, Gaál Kovalčíková A, Vavrincová-Yaghi 
D, Tóthová L, Hodosy J (2020) Behavioral changes during devel-
opment of chronic kidney disease in rats. Front Med 6:1–8. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fmed. 2019. 00311

 66.  Reyes-Ocampo J, Ramírez-Ortega D, Vázquez Cervantes GI, 
Pineda B, de Oca M, Balderas P, González-Esquivel D, Sánchez-
Chapul L, Lugo-Huitrón R, Silva-Adaya D, Ríos C, Jiménez-
Anguiano A, Pérez-de la Cruz V (2015) Mitochondrial dysfunc-
tion related to cell damage induced by 3-hydroxykynurenine and 
3-hydroxyanthranilic acid: Non-dependent-effect of early reactive 
oxygen species production. NeuroToxicology 50:81–91. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. neuro. 2015. 08. 003

 67.  Romagnani P, Remuzzi G, Glassock R, Levin A, Jager KJ, Tonelli 
M, Massy Z, Wanner C, Anders H-J (2017) Chronic kidney dis-
ease. Nat Rev Dis Primers 3:17088. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nrdp. 
2017. 88

 68.  Sárközy M, Gáspár R, Zvara Á, Siska A, Kővári B, Szűcs G, 
Márványkövi  F,  Kovács  MG,  Diószegi  P,  Bodai  L,  Zsindely 
N, Pipicz M, Gömöri K, Kiss K, Bencsik P, Cserni G, Puskás 
LG,  Földesi  I,  Thum  T  et  al  (2019)  Chronic  kidney  disease 
induces left ventricular overexpression of the pro-hypertrophic 
microRNA-212.  Sci  Rep  9:1–16.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/  
s41598- 018- 37690-5

 69.  Sárközy M, Márványkövi FM, Szűcs G, Kovács ZZA, Szabó 
MR, Gáspár R, Siska A, Kővári B, Cserni G, Földesi I, Csont 
T (2021) Ischemic preconditioning protects the heart against 
ischemia-reperfusion injury in chronic kidney disease in both 

1 3Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196 

195

males and females. Biol Sex Differ 12:49. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ 
s13293- 021- 00392-1

 70.  Sárközy M, Watzinger S, Kovács ZZA, Acar E, Márványkövi 
F, Szűcs G, Lauber GY, Galla Z, Siska A, Földesi I, Fintha A, 
Kriston A, Kovács F, Horváth P, Kővári B, Cserni G, Krenács T, 
Szabó PL, Szabó GT et al (2023) Neuregulin-1β improves uremic 
cardiomyopathy and renal dysfunction in rats. JACC Basic Transl 
Sci 8:1160–1176. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jacbts. 2023. 03. 003

 71.  Schneider  T,  Popik  P  (2007)  Attenuation  of  estrous  cycle-
dependent marble burying in female rats by acute treatment with 
progesterone and antidepressants. Psychoneuroendocrinology 
32:651–659. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. psyne uen. 2007. 04. 003
 72.  Schouten RW, Haverkamp GL, Loosman WL, Chandie Shaw PK, 
van Ittersum FJ, Smets YFC, Vleming LJ, Dekker FW, Honig 
A, Siegert CEH (2019) Anxiety symptoms, mortality, and hos-
pitalization in patients receiving maintenance dialysis: a cohort 
study. Am J Kidney Dis 74:158–166. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1053/j.  
ajkd. 2019. 02. 017

 73.  Schwanhüusser B, Busse D, Li N, Dittmar G, Schuchhardt J, Wolf 
J, Chen W, Selbach M (2011) Global quantification of mammalian 
gene expression control. Nature 473:337–342. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1038/ natur e10098

 74.  Small  DM,  Coombes  JS,  Bennett  N,  Johnson  DW,  Gobe  GC 
(2012) Oxidative stress, anti-oxidant therapies and chronic kid-
ney disease. Nephrology 17:311–321. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 
1440- 1797. 2012. 01572.x

 75.  Sturman O, Germain PL, Bohacek J (2018) Exploratory rearing: 
a context- and stress-sensitive behavior recorded in the open-field 
test. Stress 21:443–452. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 10253 890. 2018. 
14384 05

 76.  Sun C, Li J, Wang Y, Lin S-Y, Ou Y, Lin C, Wang J-D, Liao S-L, 
Chen C-J (2021) Indoxyl sulfate caused behavioral abnormal-
ity and neurodegeneration in mice with unilateral nephrectomy. 
Aging 13:1–21. https:// doi. org/ 10. 18632/ aging. 202523

 77.  Sun CY, Li JR, Wang YY, Lin SY, Ou YC, Lin CJ, Wang JD, Liao 
SL, Chen CJ (2020) P-cresol sulfate caused behavior disorders and 
neurodegeneration in mice with unilateral nephrectomy involving 
oxidative stress and neuroinflammation. Int J Mol Sci 21:1–16. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ ijms2 11866 87

 78.  Thomas A, Burant A, Bui N, Graham D, Yuva-Paylor LA, Paylor 
R (2009) Marble burying reflects a repetitive and perseverative 
behavior more than novelty-induced anxiety. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl) 204:361–373. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00213- 009- 1466-y
 79.  Topczewska-Bruns J, Tankiewicz A, Pawlak D, Buczko W (2001) 
Behavioral changes in the course of chronic renal insufficiency in 
rats. Pol J Pharmacol 53:263–269

 80.  Tóthová Ľ, Bábíčková J, Borbélyová V, Filová B, Šebeková K, 
Hodosy J (2015) Chronic renal insufficiency does not induce 
behavioral  and  cognitive  alteration  in  rats.  Physiol  Behav 
138:133–140. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. physb eh. 2014. 10. 027
 81.  Vanholder R, De Smet R, Glorieux G, Argilés A, Baurmeister 
U,  Brunet  P,  Clark  W,  Cohen  G,  De  Deyn  PP,  Deppisch  R, 
Descamps-Latscha B, Henle T, Jörres A, Lemke HD, Massy ZA, 
Passlick-Deetjen J, Rodriguez M, Stegmayr B, Stenvinkel P et al 

(2003) Review on uremic toxins: classification, concentration, and 
interindividual variability. Kidney Int 63:1934–1943. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1046/j. 1523- 1755. 2003. 00924.x

 82.  Vanholder R, Pletinck A, Schepers E, Glorieux G (2018) Bio-
chemical and clinical impact of organic uremic retention solutes: 
a comprehensive update. Toxins 10:1–57. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ 
toxin s1001 0033

 83.  Vanholder R, Schepers E, Pletinck A, Nagler EV, Glorieux G 
(2014) The uremic toxicity of indoxyl sulfate and p-cresyl sulfate: 
a systematic review. J Am Soc Nephrol 25:1897–1907. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1681/ ASN. 20131 01062

 84.  Vanholder R, Schepers E, Pletinck A, Neirynck N, Glorieux G 
(2012) An update on protein-bound uremic retention solutes. J 
Ren Nutr 22:90–94. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1053/j. jrn. 2011. 10. 026
 85.  Walf AA, Frye CA (2007) The use of the elevated plus maze 
as an assay of anxiety-related behavior in rodents. Nat Protoc 
2:322–328. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nprot. 2007. 44

 86.  Wallace EZ, Rosman P, Toshav N, Sacerdote A, Balthazar A 
(1980) Pituitary-adrenocortical function in chronic renal failure: 
studies of episodic secretion of cortisol and dexamethasone sup-
pressibility. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 50:46–51. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1210/ jcem- 50-1- 46

 87.  Watanabe R (2020) Hyperkalemia in chronic kidney disease. Rev 
Assoc Médica Bras 66:s31–s36. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1590/ 1806-  
9282. 66. S1. 31

 88.  Wee HN, Liu JJ, Ching J, Kovalik JP, Lim SC (2021) The kynure-
nine pathway in acute kidney injury and chronic kidney disease. 
Am J Nephrol 52:771–787. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1159/ 00051 9811

 89.  Wejksza K, Rzeski W, Turski WA (2009) Kynurenic acid pro-
tects against the homo-cysteine-induced impairment of endothe-
lial cells. Pharmacol Rep 61:751–756. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/  
S1734- 1140(09) 70130-6

 90.  Willis K, Cheung M, Slifer S (2013) KDIGO 2012 Clinical prac-
tice guideline for evaluation & management of CKD. Kidney Int 
Suppl 3. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ kisup. 2012. 76

 91.  Yang H-C, Zuo Y, Fogo AB (2010) Models of chronic kidney 
disease. Drug Discov Today Dis Model 7:13–19. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/j. ddmod. 2010. 08. 002

 92.  Yu YH, Kim SW, Park DK, Song HY, Kim DS, Gil HW (2021) 
Altered emotional phenotypes in chronic kidney disease following 5/6 
nephrectomy. Brain Sci 11. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ brain sci11 070882
 93.  Zhang WH, Zhang JY, Holmes A, Pan BX (2021) Amygdala cir-
cuit substrates for stress adaptation and adversity. Biol Psychiatry 
89:847–856. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. biops ych. 2020. 12. 026
 94.  Zoccali C, Vanholder R, Massy ZA, Ortiz A, Sarafidis P, Dekker 
FW, Fliser D, Fouque D, Heine GH, Jager KJ, Kanbay M, Mal-
lamaci F, Parati G, Rossignol P, Wiecek A, London G (2017) The 
systemic nature of CKD. Nat Rev Nephrol 13:344–358. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nrneph. 2017. 52

 95.  Zou M-H (2015) Tryptophan-kynurenine pathway is dysregulated 
in inflammation and immune activation. Front Biosci 20:4363. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 2741/ 4363

Publisher’s  note  Springer  Nature  remains  neutral  with  regard  to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

1 3196 

Pflügers Archiv - European Journal of Physiology (2024) 476:179–196

Authors and Affiliations

Katalin Eszter Ibos1 
Zsuzsanna Z. A. Kovács3 
István Szatmári6 

 · Éva Bodnár1 

 · Hoa Dinh2 

 · Merse Kis1,3 

 · Fanni Márványkövi3 

 · 

 · Andrea Siska4 
 · Péter Simon6 · Márta Sárközy1,3 

 · Imre Földesi4 

 · Zsolt Galla5 
 · Krisztina Csabafi1 

 · Péter Monostori5 

 · 

 *  Katalin Eszter Ibos 

ibos.kata@gmail.com

Éva Bodnár 
eva.dobo4@gmail.com

  Hoa Dinh 

dinhhoaqa@gmail.com

  Merse Kis 

kissmerse@gmail.com

Fanni Márványkövi 

  marvanykovi.fanni@gmail.com

Zsuzsanna Z. A. Kovács 
zsuzska.k93@gmail.com

  Andrea Siska 

siska.andrea@med.u-szeged.hu

Imre Földesi 
foldesi.imre@med.u-szeged.hu

Zsolt Galla 
galla.zsolt@med.u-szeged.hu

Péter Monostori 

  monostori.peter.bela@med.u-szeged.hu

István Szatmári 
szatmari.istvan@szte.hu

Péter Simon 
petersimon020@gmail.com

  Márta Sárközy 

sarkozy.marta@med.u-szeged.hu

  Krisztina Csabafi 

csabafi.krisztina@med.u-szeged.hu

1  Department of Pathophysiology, Albert Szent-Györgyi 

Medical School, University of Szeged, 1 Semmelweis utca, 
Szeged H-6725, Hungary

2  Department of Biochemistry, Bach Mai Hospital, 78 Giai 
Phong Street, Phuong Mai, Dong Da, Hanoi 100000, 
Vietnam

3  Department of Biochemistry and Interdisciplinary Centre 

of Excellence, Albert Szent-Györgyi Medical School, 9 Dóm 
tér, University of Szeged, Szeged H-6720, Hungary

4  Department of Laboratory Medicine, Albert Szent-Györgyi 
Medical School, University of Szeged, 6 Semmelweis utca, 
Szeged H-6725, Hungary

5  Metabolic and Newborn Screening Laboratory, 

Department of Pediatrics, Albert Szent-Györgyi Medical 
School, University of Szeged, 35-36 Temesvári körút, 
Szeged H-6726, Hungary

6 

Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and HUN-REN-SZTE 
Stereochemistry Research Group, University of Szeged, 6 
Eötvös utca, Szeged H-6720, Hungary

1 3
