---
pmid: 38004236
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/38004236
title: The Effects of 24-h Fasting on Exercise Performance and Metabolic Parameters in a Pilot Study of Female CrossFit Athletes.
---

Article
The Effects of 24-h Fasting on Exercise Performance and
Metabolic Parameters in a Pilot Study of Female
CrossFit Athletes

Melike Nur Eroglu 1
Silvia Burgos-Postigo 3, Olga López-Torres 3,*

, Celia Rodríguez-Longobardo 2

, Ana Ramírez-Adrados 3
and Valentín E. Fernández-Elías 3

, Clara Colina-Coca 4,

1 Coaching Education Department, Sports Science Faculty, Sakarya University of Applied Sciences,

2

3

4

Serdivan 54050, Turkey; melikeeroglu@subu.edu.tr
Social Sciences of Physical Activity, Sport and Leisure Department, Faculty of Physical Activity and Sport
Sciences, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain; celia.rlongobardo@upm.es
Faculty of Sports Sciences, Universidad Europea de Madrid, 28670 Villaviciosa de Odón, Spain;
ana.ramirez@universidadeuropea.es (A.R.-A.); silvia.burgos@universidadeuropea.es (S.B.-P.);
valentin.fernandez@universidadeuropea.es (V.E.F.-E.)
Faculty of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Universidad Europea de Madrid, 28670 Villaviciosa de Odón,
Spain; clara.colina@universidadeuropea.es

* Correspondence: olga.lopez@universidadeuropea.es

Abstract: Many studies have tested intermittent fasting (IF) in athletes, but its effects on female
CrossFit athletes remain relatively unexplored in the existing literature. The aim of this study
was to evaluate and compare the effects of 24-h IF on the physical performance of female CrossFit
practitioners. Eleven female CrossFit athletes (age: 30.91 ± 3.42, weight: 65.26 ± 7.55 kg, height:
1.66 ± 0.05 m) participated in the study. The study used a crossover design with fasting and eating
conditions. Participants completed an exercise test, standing long jump, and handgrip strength
assessment. Hydration status, heart rate, blood lactate, blood glucose, rates of perceived exertion,
and hunger were measured. Results showed signiﬁcant differences in blood lactate concentration
(F = 5.435, p = 0.042, η2p = 0.352). Resting blood lactate concentration was signiﬁcantly lower in the
fasting trial than in the eating trial (p < 0.001), but post-exercise blood lactate concentrations were
higher in the fasting trial than in the eating trial (p < 0.001). No differences were found in performance
times (p > 0.05). In conclusion, this pilot study of females suggests that 24-h fasting does not impair
exercise performance or negatively affect physiological parameters in CrossFit athletes.

Keywords: intermittent fasting; crossFit; exercise performance; fatigue; blood lactate

1. Introduction

Intermittent fasting (IF) is a popular dietary practice, which consists of regular alter-
nating periods of unrestricted dietary consumption and abstinence from caloric intake.
In recent years, various forms of IF have been extensively investigated with the aim of
improving exercise performance and enhancing metabolic health.

There have been several proposed protocols/methods of IF that are in practice. Some
of the common ones include alternate-day fasting, which involves fasting for 24-h every
other day, and the 5:2 method, which involves a fast of 24-h twice a week and a very
low-calorie diet consumed two other days of the week. In these protocols, fasting can take
place on consecutive or non-consecutive days [1]. Fasting is also an important part of many
religions, a notable example being Muslims fasting during Ramadan, a month-long period
during which no food or liquid is consumed during daylight hours [2].

These fasting protocols have been associated with various health beneﬁts such as
increasing metabolic ﬂexibility, improving insulin sensitivity, promoting weight loss, and

Citation: Eroglu, M.N.;

Rodríguez-Longobardo, C.;

Ramírez-Adrados, A.; Colina-Coca,

C.; Burgos-Postigo, S.; López-Torres,

O.; Fernández-Elías, V.E. The Effects

of 24-h Fasting on Exercise

Performance and Metabolic

Parameters in a Pilot Study of Female

CrossFit Athletes. Nutrients 2023, 15,

4841. https://doi.org/10.3390/

nu15224841

Academic Editors: Benjamin

D. Horne and Peter WR Lemon

Received: 11 October 2023

Revised: 10 November 2023

Accepted: 18 November 2023

Published: 20 November 2023

Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

Nutrients 2023, 15, 4841. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15224841

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients

nutrientsNutrients 2023, 15, 4841

2 of 10

even slowing down the aging process. However, our knowledge about the effects of IF
modalities as a factor inﬂuencing athletic performance is limited.

Speciﬁcally, short-term (acute) fasting protocols such as the 24-h fasting period can
impact exercise performance. During this period, the body utilizes glycogen stores and
increases fat metabolism to provide energy. This can lead to changes in energy production
mechanisms and potentially affect exercise performance positively or negatively [3].

The effects of short-term fasting on exercise performance have been extensively in-
vestigated, and suggest that decreased physical performance occurs during the fasting
state [4]. This could be explained (at least in part) by the fasting periods used (>24 to 55 h),
dehydration, prolonged exhaustive exercise tests [5–7], and/or very high-intensity levels of
exercise [7,8]. However, others [9–12] failed to record signiﬁcant decreases in performance
after shorter periods of fasting (11–24 h).

CrossFit is a high-intensity fitness training program that combines elements of weightlift-
ing, cardiovascular exercise, and bodyweight movements. It aims to improve overall ﬁtness
by focusing on functional movements performed at a high intensity. CrossFit workouts,
known as “WOD” (Workout of the Day), are constantly varied and incorporate exercises
from various disciplines, such as weightlifting, gymnastics, and metabolic conditioning [13].
Different nutritional strategies and approaches are used to improve the performance
of CrossFit practitioners, and intermittent fasting can be compatible with CrossFit as indi-
viduals can schedule their eating windows around their workouts. Aerobic and anaerobic
energy production processes form the basis of CrossFit training, and how these energy
systems are affected under IF diets is not yet fully understood since most of them are
empirical and lack scientiﬁc evidence [14,15]. Studies have focused more on selected nutri-
tional interventions, such as the ketogenic diet [16,17], pre- and post-workout protein, and
carbohydrate intake [18–21].

In a study of 2576 CrossFit practitioners, it was reported that 7.7% of the participants
were on an IF diet [22]. Considering sex when prescribing dietary strategies is important
because men and women have distinct physiological differences (hormonal variations,
body composition, and metabolic rates) that can affect their nutritional needs and health
outcomes [23]. A recent study [24] surveyed 449 CrossFit practitioners about their workouts
and dietary intake and concluded that it is necessary to consider sex when prescribing
dietary strategies. Speciﬁcally, it has been reported that women more often choose weight
loss and fat loss as their nutritional goals, while men are more likely to choose to gain
muscle mass and weight. These ﬁndings are consistent with previous research on exercise
behavior where women exercise more frequently than men to lose weight and men tend to
gain muscle mass/weight [25,26].

Based on the information presented, the effects of IF diets on female CrossFit athletes
remain relatively unexplored in the existing literature. Therefore, the aim of this study was
to assess and compare the effects of 24 h fasting on the physical performance of female
CrossFit practitioners. Our hypothesis was that a 24 h fasting period would not negatively
affect physical performance compared with a normal pre-exercise diet.

2. Material and Methods
2.1. Participant Selection and Study Design

Eleven female crossfitters (characteristics: age: 30.91 ± 3.42, weight: 65.26 ± 7.55 kg,
height: 1.66 ± 0.05 m) participated in the study. The number of participants was determined
according to the power analysis results. All were recruited from the same local CrossFit
gym. Recruitment and study took place in July 2023. Inclusion criteria were: (1) being
female; (2) being 18 or older; and (3) having CrossFit training experience for at least
2 years. The exclusion criteria were: (1) following pharmacological treatment or supplement
(including the use of stimulants such as caffeine), (2) muscular, ligamentous, bone, nerve,
or joint pathology incompatible with the training program; (3) present cardiovascular or
cardiorespiratory problems; and (4) performance of other sports activities during their
participation in the study that could inﬂuence the study results. All participants were

Nutrients 2023, 15, 4841

3 of 10

assessed in the same menstrual cycle phase (late follicular, after the subject’s reported
menstruation) to avoid the effects of the menstrual cycle phase on exercise capacity [27].

Before commencing the study, all subjects were informed about the experimental
procedures and the possible risks and beneﬁts of the study. Each subject signed a written
informed consent form prior to participation. The study protocol was approved by the
Local Clinical Research Ethics Committee of Madrid (47/764390/17) and was in accordance
with the Declaration of Helsinki.

The present study used a within-subject counterbalanced crossover design, as this
design has many advantages: each subject acted as their own control, thus reducing possible
error variance, while at the same time reducing the required sample size. Each participant
was tested under fasting and non-fasting conditions. While the fasting + exercise trial was
conducted in the ﬁrst week, a normal diet + exercise trial was conducted on the same day
and time one week later. Participants completed an exercise test, a standing long jump,
and a handgrip strength test. Hydration status, heart rate, blood lactate, blood glucose,
perceived exertion, and hunger were measured. All participants performed the same set of
tests in the same order on each trial. To eliminate the learning effect, the protocols were
explained to the participants in advance and practiced. They were asked to refrain from
any strenuous exercise 24 h before the test.

2.2. Nutrition Protocol

The participants were provided with the fasting/eating protocol prior to each test
period. It was therefore not possible to blind study participants to the testing conditions.
In the fasting trial, participants consumed only water for 24 h before exercise. In the
eating trial, the instruction given to the participants was to have their last meal previous
to the assessment within 2–3 h prior to exercise. On the other hand, participants were
provided with nutritional guidelines for the meal before the physical test, which consisted
of consuming a meal composed of 50% carbohydrates, 25% fats, and 25% proteins according
to the validated visual nutritional tool Athlete’s Plate® [28].

With the aim of promoting adherence, all subjects were briefed on the hard train-
ing day Athlete’s Plate® protocol, as it adjusts the composition of main food groups on
the plate to align with high-intensity training days and meet international sports nutri-
tion guidelines [29,30]. Furthermore, a categorized list of foods based on their primary
macronutrient content was provided, along with meal ideas, to empower participants to
make well-informed dietary decisions.

The athletes were encouraged to contact the dieticians with any questions or concerns
regarding the nutritional protocol. All instructions about nutritional guidelines were
provided by registered dieticians.

In both test conditions, participants were asked to avoid strenuous physical activity to
minimize the potential carry-over effects such as fatigue, muscle damage, or physiological
stress. Prior to each testing period, a pre-trial checklist was completed to collect information
about the participants’ activities over the previous 24-h (e.g., time of last meal, exercise
performed, and any injuries since the last contact).

2.3. Physical Testing
2.3.1. Exercise Test

The exercise test consisted of 5 sets of 10 × burpee over bar, 10 × pendlay rowing,
10 × deep squats, and 4 × 20 m sprints. Participants were asked to be as fast as possible,
and times were recorded the assess physical performance.

2.3.2. Standing Long Jump

The standing long jump test was used to measure strength and sprint speed [31].
Participants were instructed to perform a standing long jump from a position behind a
designated starting line, with the aim of achieving the maximum distance forward using
both legs. The distance covered during the jump was quantiﬁed in centimeters, determined

Nutrients 2023, 15, 4841

4 of 10

by measuring from the front edge of the starting line to the point of initial heel contact with
the ground.

2.3.3. Handgrip Strength

Handgrip strength test was performed as an indicator of overall strength [32]. This
test was performed using a hydraulic hand-held dynamometer (Takei 5001, Japan) with
an accuracy of 0.1 kg. Before and after the test, the subjects held a standardized position
(standing, with the elbow in full extension) for 2–3 s at maximum pressure. All participants
repeated the test twice, alternating between each hand. The researchers recorded the best
score from the two trials.

2.4. Measurements
2.4.1. Hydration Level

Immediately before exercise, the participants were asked to provide a urine sample. A
standard well-established urine color scale [33], with demonstrated test-retest reliability
and validity [34,35], was used to assess hydration status. The urine samples were held
against a white background and the urine color scores were determined using numbers to
describe the hydration status, i.e., numbers 1–3 indicate hyperhydrated hydration status,
4 indicate euhyrated hydration status, and 5–8 indicate hypohydrated hydration status.

2.4.2. Heart Rate

The heart rate was monitored during exercise and at rest using a Polar H10 heart rate
monitor (Kempele, Finland). The Elite HRV (Heart Rate Variability, NC, ABD) application
was used as the data receiver in a Bluetooth connection to record HR (HR average) and
measure heart rate variability (HRV). The Elite HRV application has been previously
validated for HRV recording [36]. For HRV measurement, the square root of the mean of
the sum of the squared differences between normal adjacent RR intervals (RMSSD), the
low-frequency band (LF), and the high-frequency band (HF) were analyzed [37].

2.4.3. Blood Lactate

Using a disposable lancet device, the skin was punctured just at the center of the ﬁnger
pad. The ﬁrst drop of blood was wiped away, and then approximately 5 µL (2 mm) of blood
was applied to the lactate strip and immediately analyzed using the Lactate Pro Analyser
(ARKRAY Inc., Kyoto, Japan) [38]. Blood lactate concentrations were measured at rest
(pre-exercise) and immediately after the completion of the exercise protocol (post-exercise).

2.4.4. Blood Glucose

Blood glucose measurements were taken from the ﬁngertip using a glucose analyzer
(Freestyle Optium Neo, Abbot, Madrid, Spain). The blood glucose was measured both
before and immediately after the completion of the 5 sets performed by the participants.
Blood sampling was carried out immediately after lactate analysis.

2.4.5. Rate of Perceived Exertion (RPE)

The Borg CR-10 scale was used to assess the perceived exertion. The assessments
were made pre- and post-exercise. Participants were given detailed instructions on how to
rate the experience in terms of perceived exertion. Each participant rated the perception
of physical effort on a scale from “absolutely nothing” (score 0) to “extremely strong”
(score 10) [39].

2.4.6. Hunger Feelings

Hunger feeling was assessed pre- and post-training using a Visual Analog Scale (VAS),
where participants had to rate their sensation from 0 to 10. A score of 0 represents the
“absence of hunger sensation” and 10 represents “very hungry”. The VAS method has been
validated in several populations [40].

Nutrients 2023, 15, 4841

5 of 10

2.5. Statistical Analysis

Statistical analysis was performed with the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences
(SPSS, version 24, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) in the Windows environment. Data are
presented as mean ± SD. The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to conﬁrm a normal
distribution of data. To assess variables measured pre- and post-exercise, a two-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with repeated measures was conducted to determine the
main effects of the experimental trials (fasting vs. pre-competition diet) and time (pre-
vs. post-exercise) as well as interaction (experimental trial × time). Bonferroni post hoc
analysis was performed when a signiﬁcant F value (Greenhouse–Geisser adjustment for
sphericity) was observed. For single measure variables, a Student t-test was performed.
The effect size was estimated by calculating partial eta squared (η2p) and Cohen’s d, for
pre- and post-exercise and single measure variables, respectively.

3. Results

The ANOVA analysis revealed signiﬁcant differences in blood lactate concentration
(F = 5.435, p = 0.042, η2p = 0.352). The resting blood lactate concentration in the fasting trial
was signiﬁcantly lower than that in the eating trial (p < 0.001). Interestingly, post-exercise
blood lactate concentrations were higher in the fasting trial compared to the eating trial
(p <0.001, Figure 1). There was no signiﬁcant difference between trials in RPE (p > 0.05,
Table 1).

Figure 1. Pre- and post-exercise lactate blood levels. * Signiﬁcantly different than fasting trial
(p < 0.05). † Signiﬁcantly different than pre-exercise (p < 0.05).

Table 1. Pre- and post-exercise measurements.

RPE (1;10)

Ratings of Hunger
(0;10)

HGS Right (kg)

HGS Left (kg)

Jumping (cm)

Pre-Exercise

Post-Exercise

F

Fasting
Eating
Fasting
Eating
Fasting
Eating
Fasting
Eating
Fasting
Eating

4.09 ± 2.02
3.09 ± 1.51
5.86 ± 3.03
1.54 ± 1.91
32.95 ± 3.61
33.04 ± 3.32
32.40 ± 4.32
31.86 ± 3.49
175.11 ± 20.97
167.66 ± 18.94

8.18 ± 1.32
7.27 ± 0.78
1.90 ± 1.97
0.63 ± 1.56
33.68 ± 2.76
33.40 ± 3.11
31.81 ± 4.40
31.81 ± 4.93
168.66 ± 25.63
170.11 ± 18.98

0.009

8.213

0.084

0.163

1.692

p

0.928

0.017

0.777

0.695

0.230

η2p

0.001

0.451

0.008

0.016

0.175

Post Hoc

Pre-fasting vs. eating p < 0.001:
Post-fasting vs. eating p < 0.001

RPE, Rate of perceived exertion; HGS, Handgrip strength. Note: data expressed as the mean ± standard
deviation (SD).

Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 11    Figure 1. Pre- and post-exercise lactate blood levels. * Significantly different than fasting trial (p < 0.05). † Significantly different than pre-exercise (p < 0.05). In terms of blood glucose concentration (F = 16.80, p = 0.002, η2p = 0.627), resting levels were significantly lower in the fasting trial than in the eating trial (p < 0.001). However, the increase in blood glucose concentration from pre- to post-exercise was not significantly dif-ferent between the two conditions (Figure 2).  Figure 2. Pre- and post-exercise glucose blood levels. * Significantly different than fasting trial (p < 0.05). † Significantly different than pre-exercise (p < 0.05). Participants reported higher levels of hunger both pre- and post-exercise in the fasting trial compared to the eating trial (p < 0.001, Table 1). Handgrip strength values measured with both the right and left hand were not affected by the fasting or eating trials. No significant differences were observed pre- and post-exer-cise (p > 0.05). In addition, there were no significant differences in standing jumping dis-tances between pre- and post-exercise measurements in either the fasting or eating trials (p > 0.05, Table 1). No significant differences in performance times were found between the fasting and eating trials (p > 0.05). Resting heart rates before exercise were not significantly different between the fasting and eating trials (71.3 ± 8.3 vs. 67.42 ± 7.44 bpm, fasting vs. eating, re-spectively, p = 0.131, t = 1.647, η2 = 0.49). Additionally, heart rate values (RMSSD, LF, HF, Mean HR) during exercise were similar between the fasting and eating trials (Table 2).   Nutrients 2023, 15, 4841

6 of 10

In terms of blood glucose concentration (F = 16.80, p = 0.002, η2p = 0.627), resting levels
were signiﬁcantly lower in the fasting trial than in the eating trial (p < 0.001). However,
the increase in blood glucose concentration from pre- to post-exercise was not signiﬁcantly
different between the two conditions (Figure 2).

Figure 2. Pre- and post-exercise glucose blood levels. * Signiﬁcantly different than fasting trial
(p < 0.05). † Signiﬁcantly different than pre-exercise (p < 0.05).

Participants reported higher levels of hunger both pre- and post-exercise in the fasting

trial compared to the eating trial (p < 0.001, Table 1).

Handgrip strength values measured with both the right and left hand were not affected
by the fasting or eating trials. No signiﬁcant differences were observed pre- and post-
exercise (p > 0.05). In addition, there were no signiﬁcant differences in standing jumping
distances between pre- and post-exercise measurements in either the fasting or eating trials
(p > 0.05, Table 1).

No signiﬁcant differences in performance times were found between the fasting and
eating trials (p > 0.05). Resting heart rates before exercise were not signiﬁcantly different
between the fasting and eating trials (71.3 ± 8.3 vs. 67.42 ± 7.44 bpm, fasting vs. eating,
respectively, p = 0.131, t = 1.647, η2 = 0.49). Additionally, heart rate values (RMSSD, LF, HF,
Mean HR) during exercise were similar between the fasting and eating trials (Table 2).

Table 2. During exercise HRV and performance time.

Fasting

Eating

Performance Time (min)
Mean Heart Rate (bpm)
LF Power (ms2)
HF Power (ms2)
RMSSD (ms)

12.02 ± 2.4
161.00 ± 13.26
32,493.79 ± 56,646.62
88,773.22 ± 200,141.76
82.70 ± 49.52

11.24 ± 2.22
160.81 ± 8.43
22,355.43 ± 42,151.57
52,884.66 ± 139,620.94
76.83 ± 56.82

t

1.911
0.045
0.442
0.455
0.277

p

0.085
0.965
0.668
0.659
0.787

d

0.32
0.01
0.20
0.20
0.11

Min, minute; bpm, beats·min−1; LF, low-frequency power; ms2, milliseconds squared; HF, high-frequency power;
RMSSD, root mean square of the successive differences. Statistical signiﬁcance set at p < 0.05. Note: data expressed
as the mean ± standard deviation (SD).

Finally, no signiﬁcant difference in pre-exercise hydration levels was observed between
the fasting and eating trials (2.33 ± 1.33 vs. 2.1 ± 0.87, fasting vs. eating, respectively,
p = 0.662, t = 0.452, η2 = 0.17).

4. Discussion

Our study aimed to investigate the effects of fasting on exercise performance and
related physiological parameters in a group of female CrossFit athletes. The results showed
that 24-h fasting can lead to lower resting blood lactate concentrations, increased post-
exercise lactate levels, and higher subjective hunger levels. However, fasting did not

Nutrients 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 11    Figure 1. Pre- and post-exercise lactate blood levels. * Significantly different than fasting trial (p < 0.05). † Significantly different than pre-exercise (p < 0.05). In terms of blood glucose concentration (F = 16.80, p = 0.002, η2p = 0.627), resting levels were significantly lower in the fasting trial than in the eating trial (p < 0.001). However, the increase in blood glucose concentration from pre- to post-exercise was not significantly dif-ferent between the two conditions (Figure 2).  Figure 2. Pre- and post-exercise glucose blood levels. * Significantly different than fasting trial (p < 0.05). † Significantly different than pre-exercise (p < 0.05). Participants reported higher levels of hunger both pre- and post-exercise in the fasting trial compared to the eating trial (p < 0.001, Table 1). Handgrip strength values measured with both the right and left hand were not affected by the fasting or eating trials. No significant differences were observed pre- and post-exer-cise (p > 0.05). In addition, there were no significant differences in standing jumping dis-tances between pre- and post-exercise measurements in either the fasting or eating trials (p > 0.05, Table 1). No significant differences in performance times were found between the fasting and eating trials (p > 0.05). Resting heart rates before exercise were not significantly different between the fasting and eating trials (71.3 ± 8.3 vs. 67.42 ± 7.44 bpm, fasting vs. eating, re-spectively, p = 0.131, t = 1.647, η2 = 0.49). Additionally, heart rate values (RMSSD, LF, HF, Mean HR) during exercise were similar between the fasting and eating trials (Table 2).   Nutrients 2023, 15, 4841

7 of 10

signiﬁcantly affect ratings of perceived exertion, post-exercise blood glucose concentration,
handgrip strength, jumping performance, performance times, heart rate parameters, or
hydration levels.

Blood lactate concentration is an important indicator of the metabolic response to
exercise and fatigue levels. Our results showed that resting blood lactate levels were
signiﬁcantly lower in the fasting trial compared to the eating trial. The lower resting
lactate levels observed in the fasting trial could be attributed to a decrease in carbohydrate
availability, leading to reduced resting glycolytic activity and thus lower lactate production.
Post-exercise blood lactate concentrations were higher in the fasting trial compared
to the eating trial. This indicates that fasting may lead to increased lactate production
during exercise. Previous research on athletes has shown that fasting can improve lactate
production and clearance during exercise [12,41]. The higher post-exercise lactate levels
observed in the fasting trial could be attributed to an increased reliance on glycogenolysis
and subsequent lactate production as an alternative energy source in the absence of readily
available carbohydrates. This increased lactate production may have resulted from the
recruitment of a greater mass of higher threshold glycolytic fast-twitch ﬁbers, as the
population of slow-twitch ﬁbers became increasingly glycogen-depleted and fatigued. Loy
et al. [7] found a signiﬁcant increase in lactate concentration accompanied by a decrease
in skeletal muscle glycogen after a 24-h fasting and exercise to exhaustion. Furthermore,
elevated norepinephrine levels in the fasting trial may have impeded lactate clearance by
diverting blood ﬂow away from the liver [7,42].

Despite the differences in blood lactate concentrations, we did not observe any signiﬁ-
cant differences in RPE between the fasting and eating trials. This suggests that subjective
perceptions of effort during exercise were similar regardless of the fasting state. Similar
ﬁndings have been reported in previous studies comparing RPE between fasting and eating
states [43]. It is possible that other factors, such as motivational factors or the participants’
adaptation to training in a fasted state, may have inﬂuenced their perceived exertion
levels [44].

Our study also investigated the effects of fasting on blood glucose concentration.
Resting blood glucose levels were signiﬁcantly lower in the fasting trial compared to the
eating trial, which is consistent with previous research showing reduced blood glucose
levels during fasting [12,45,46]. However, the increase in blood glucose concentration
from pre- to post-exercise was not signiﬁcantly different between the two conditions. This
suggests that the body’s compensatory mechanisms, such as increased gluconeogenesis and
glycogen breakdown, adequately maintain blood glucose levels during exercise regardless
of the fasting state [4].

The fasting trial had higher hunger levels both pre- and post-exercise compared to the
eating trial. The subjective experience of hunger was inﬂuenced by hormonal changes and
lack of food intake, which can lead to higher perceived hunger levels in fasting individuals.
The feeling of hunger post-exercise decreased in both trials. This effect is due to the ability
of acute exercise to temporarily suppress appetite-regulating hormones [47].

A recent meta-analysis of twenty-eight studies suggests that IF does not affect muscle
strength and anaerobic capacity [48]. In terms of physical performance, fasting did not
signiﬁcantly affect performance time, handgrip strength values, or standing jumping
distances in our study. The effect of short-term fasting on exercise capacity has been
extensively investigated, with many studies concluding that fasting prior to exercise results
in impaired performance [8,12]. This outcome has been attributed, in part, to the adoption
of prolonged fasting periods (>24 to 55 h), dehydration [10], prolonged exhaustive exercise
testing [5,6], or engaging in very high-intensity levels of exercise [7,8]. However, some
researchers have failed to observe a signiﬁcant decline in performance after shorter fasting
periods (11–24 h) [10,12]. This discrepancy in ﬁndings could be potentially explained by the
glycogen-sparing effect of fasting before exercise, which is linked to increased availability of
free fatty acids, thus accounting for the absence of performance decline during short-term
fasting [9,11].

Nutrients 2023, 15, 4841

8 of 10

Our study showed that performance time exhibits a nonsigniﬁcant trend, being 7%
longer after fasting compared to the eating state. As we acclimatized the participants to the
exercise protocol, we do not believe that the difference could be due to a learning effect.
However, this could be due to the small sample size, which is a limitation of the present
study. In this line, the β level for performance analysis was 0.996, which indicates that the
statistical power was low. Thus, the null hypothesis may not be rejected.

Resting heart rate and heart rate variability during exercise were not signiﬁcantly
different between the fasting and eating trials. There is conﬂicting information about the
effect of fasting on heart rate during exercise. Sabah Hammoud et al. [49] found that fasting
during Ramadan signiﬁcantly increased HRV in the afternoon. Mzurak et al. [50] conﬁrm
that an acute (48 h) total fasting induces parasympathetic withdrawal with simultaneous
sympathetic activation. These changes appear to reﬂect stress, which may be related to
feelings of hunger. The most likely explanation of the effect of attenuation of HR in the
fasting state compared to the eating state may be related to a higher parasympathetic activity
during fasting [51,52]. The variations in these ﬁndings may be attributed to differences
in fasting duration, exercise intensity, and participant characteristics. Future studies with
larger sample sizes and more comprehensive monitoring of heart rate parameters are
warranted to provide a clearer understanding of the relationship between fasting and
cardiovascular responses to exercise.

Finally, our study found no signiﬁcant difference in hydration levels between the
fasting and eating trials. This suggests that participants maintained adequate hydration
status in both conditions. Hydration is crucial for optimal exercise performance. However,
as far as we know, no study has investigated the effects of 24-h fasting on hydration status.
However, previous research [48] has reported that prolonged fasting has a detrimental
effect on hydration status and impairs performance.

The present study is not without limitations. As mentioned earlier, the sample size
was small, and a larger number of participants could have yielded different statistical
outcomes. Additionally, another limitation is the absence of additional parameters that
could be relevant in a fasting-exercise context, such as blood fatty acids and levels of
stress-related hormones like cortisol.

5. Conclusions

In conclusion, these female-speciﬁc ﬁndings in a small pilot study are generally
consistent with previous research on athletes and support the concept that short-term
fasting does not impair exercise performance or negatively impact physiological parameters
in female CrossFit athletes. Future research with larger sample sizes and diverse athlete
populations is needed to further validate and extend these ﬁndings.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, O.L.-T. and V.E.F.-E.; methodology, M.N.E., C.R.-L., O.L.-T.
and V.E.F.-E.; formal analysis, M.N.E., A.R.-A. and V.E.F.-E.; investigation, M.N.E., C.R.-L., A.R.-A.,
S.B.-P., O.L.-T. and V.E.F.-E.; resources, O.L.-T. and V.E.F.-E.; data curation, M.N.E., A.R.-A. and
V.E.F.-E.; writing—original draft preparation, M.N.E., C.R.-L., A.R.-A., C.C.-C., S.B.-P., O.L.-T. and
V.E.F.-E.; writing—review and editing, M.N.E., O.L.-T. and V.E.F.-E.; visualization, M.N.E., C.R.-L.,
O.L.-T. and V.E.F.-E.; supervision, S.B.-P., O.L.-T. and V.E.F.-E.; project administration, O.L.-T. and
V.E.F.-E.; funding acquisition, O.L.-T. and V.E.F.-E. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the
Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Local Clinical Research Ethics Committee of Madrid
(47/764390/17).

Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.

Data Availability Statement: All the data are presented in the study.

Acknowledgments: We thank the participants for their invaluable contribution to the study.

Nutrients 2023, 15, 4841

9 of 10

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.
2.

3.

4.

Vasim, I.; Majeed, C.N.; DeBoer, M.D. Intermittent Fasting and Metabolic Health. Nutrients 2022, 14, 631. [CrossRef]
Levy, E.; Chu, T. Intermittent Fasting and Its Effects on Athletic Performance: A Review. Curr. Sports Med. Rep. 2019, 18, 266–269.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Chaouachi, A.; Leiper, J.B.; Souissi, N.; Coutts, A.J.; Chamari, K. Effects of Ramadan intermittent fasting on sports performance
and training: A review. Int. J. Sports Physiol. Perform. 2009, 4, 419–434. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Zouhal, H.; Saeidi, A.; Salhi, A.; Li, H.; Essop, M.F.; Laher, I.; Rhibi, F.; Amani-Shalamzari, S.; Ben Abderrahman, A. Exercise
Training and Fasting: Current Insights. Open Access J. Sports Med. 2020, 11, 1–28. [CrossRef]

5. Hagan, R.D.; Upton, S.J.; Wong, L.; Whittam, J. The effects of aerobic conditioning and/or caloric restriction in overweight men

6.

7.

8.
9.

and women. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 1986, 18, 87–94. [CrossRef]
Keim, N.L.; Barbieri, T.F.; Van Loan, M.D.; Anderson, B.L. Energy expenditure and physical performance in overweight women:
Response to training with and without caloric restriction. Metab. Clin. Exp. 1990, 39, 651–658. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Loy, S.F.; Conlee, R.K.; Winder, W.W.; Nelson, A.G.; Arnall, D.A.; Fisher, A.G. Effects of 24-hour fast on cycling endurance time at
two different intensities. J. Appl. Physiol. 1986, 61, 654–659. [CrossRef]
Aragon-Vargas, L.F. Effects of fasting on endurance exercise. Sports Med. 1993, 16, 255–265. [CrossRef]
Ferguson, L.M.; Rossi, K.A.; Ward, E.; Jadwin, E.; Miller, T.A.; Miller, W.C. Effects of caloric restriction and overnight fasting on
cycling endurance performance. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2009, 23, 560–570. [CrossRef]

10. Gueye, L.; Samb, A.; Seck, D.; Cissé, F.; Camara, K.; Martineaud, J. Inﬂuence of a 12 hours-fast on maximal exercise. Scr. Medica

(Brno) 2004, 77, 5–8.

11. Knapik, J.J.; Jones, B.H.; Meredith, C.; Evans, W.J. Inﬂuence of a 3.5 day fast on physical performance. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occup.

Physiol. 1987, 56, 428–432. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

12. Zinker, B.A.; Britz, K.; Brooks, G.A. Effects of a 36-hour fast on human endurance and substrate utilization. J. Appl. Physiol. 1990,

13.

69, 1849–1855. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Feito, Y.; Heinrich, K.M.; Butcher, S.J.; Poston, W.S.C. High-Intensity Functional Training (HIFT): Deﬁnition and Research
Implications for Improved Fitness. Sports 2018, 6, 76. [CrossRef]

14. de Souza, R.A.S.; da Silva, A.G.; de Souza, M.F.; Souza, L.K.F.; Roschel, H.; da Silva, S.F.; Saunders, B. A Systematic Review of
CrossFit(R) Workouts and Dietary and Supplementation Interventions to Guide Nutritional Strategies and Future Research in
CrossFit(R). Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 2021, 31, 187–205. [CrossRef]

15. Dos Santos Quaresma, M.V.L.; Guazzelli Marques, C.; Nakamoto, F.P. Effects of diet interventions, dietary supplements, and
performance-enhancing substances on the performance of CrossFit-trained individuals: A systematic review of clinical studies.
Nutrition 2021, 82, 110994. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

16. Durkalec-Michalski, K.; Nowaczyk, P.M.; Siedzik, K. Effect of a four-week ketogenic diet on exercise metabolism in CrossFit-

trained athletes. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr. 2019, 16, 16. [CrossRef]

17. Kephart, W.C.; Pledge, C.D.; Roberson, P.A.; Mumford, P.W.; Romero, M.A.; Mobley, C.B.; Martin, J.S.; Young, K.C.; Lowery,
R.P.; Wilson, J.M.; et al. The Three-Month Effects of a Ketogenic Diet on Body Composition, Blood Parameters, and Performance
Metrics in CrossFit Trainees: A Pilot Study. Sports 2018, 6, 1. [CrossRef]

18. Banaszek, A.; Townsend, J.R.; Bender, D.; Vantrease, W.C.; Marshall, A.C.; Johnson, K.D. The Effects of Whey vs. Pea Protein
on Physical Adaptations Following 8-Weeks of High-Intensity Functional Training (HIFT): A Pilot Study. Sports 2019, 7, 12.
[CrossRef]

19. Escobar, K.A.; Morales, J.; Vandusseldorp, T.A. The Effect of a Moderately Low and High Carbohydrate Intake on Crossﬁt

Performance. Int. J. Exerc. Sci. 2016, 9, 460–470.

20. Outlaw, J.J.; Wilborn, C.D.; Smith-Ryan, A.E.; Hayward, S.E.; Urbina, S.L.; Taylor, L.W.; Foster, C.A. Effects of a pre-and

post-workout protein-carbohydrate supplement in trained crossﬁt individuals. SpringerPlus 2014, 3, 369. [CrossRef]

21. Rountree, J.A.; Krings, B.M.; Peterson, T.J.; Thigpen, A.G.; McAllister, M.J.; Holmes, M.E.; Smith, J.W. Efﬁcacy of Carbohydrate

Ingestion on CrossFit Exercise Performance. Sports 2017, 5, 61. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

22. Brisebois, M.; Kramer, S.; Lindsay, K.G.; Wu, C.T.; Kamla, J. Dietary practices and supplement use among CrossFit(R) participants.

J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr. 2022, 19, 316–335. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

23. Wohlgemuth, K.J.; Arieta, L.R.; Brewer, G.J.; Hoselton, A.; Gould, L.M.; Smith-Ryan, A.E. Sex differences and considerations for

female speciﬁc nutritional strategies: A narrative review. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr. 2021, 18, 1. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

24. Pearson, R.C.; Jenkins, N.T. Dietary Intake of Adults Who Participate in CrossFit((R)) Exercise Regimens. Sports 2022, 10, 38.

25.

26.

[CrossRef]
Jonason, P.K. An evolutionary psychology perspective on sex differences in exercise behaviors and motivations. J. Soc. Psychol.
2007, 147, 5–14. [CrossRef]
Silberstein, L.R.; Striegel-Moore, R.H.; Timko, C.; Rodin, J. Behavioral and psychological implications of body dissatisfaction: Do
men and women differ? Sex Roles 1988, 19, 219–232. [CrossRef]

27. Carmichael, M.A.; Thomson, R.L.; Moran, L.J.; Wycherley, T.P. The Impact of Menstrual Cycle Phase on Athletes’ Performance: A

Narrative Review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 1667. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2023, 15, 4841

10 of 10

28. Reguant-Closa, A.; Harris, M.M.; Lohman, T.G.; Meyer, N.L. Validation of the Athlete’s Plate Nutrition Educational Tool: Phase I.

Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 2019, 29, 628–635. [CrossRef]

29. Kerksick, C.M.; Wilborn, C.D.; Roberts, M.D.; Smith-Ryan, A.; Kleiner, S.M.; Jager, R.; Collins, R.; Cooke, M.; Davis, J.N.; Galvan,
E.; et al. ISSN exercise & sports nutrition review update: Research & recommendations. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr. 2018, 15, 38.
[CrossRef]

30. Reguant-Closa, A.; Roesch, A.; Lansche, J.; Nemecek, T.; Lohman, T.G.; Meyer, N.L. The Environmental Impact of the Athlete’s

Plate Nutrition Education Tool. Nutrients 2020, 12, 2484. [CrossRef]

31. Wakai, M.; Linthorne, N. Optimum take-off angle in the standing long jump. Hum. Mov. Sci. 2005, 24, 81–96. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Cronin, J.; Lawton, T.W.; Harris, N.; Kilding, A.E.; McMaster, D.T. A brief review of handgrip strength and sport performance. J.

Strength Cond. Res. 2017, 31, 3187–3217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

33. Armstrong, L.E.; Maresh, C.M.; Castellani, J.W.; Bergeron, M.F.; Keneﬁck, R.W.; LaGasse, K.E.; Riebe, D. Urinary indices of

hydration status. Int. J. Sport Nutr. 1994, 4, 265–279. [CrossRef]

34. Armstrong, L.E. Hydration assessment techniques. Nutr. Rev. 2005, 63, S40–S54. [CrossRef]
35.

Fernandez-Elias, V.E.; Martinez-Abellan, A.; Lopez-Gullon, J.M.; Moran-Navarro, R.; Pallares, J.G.; De la Cruz-Sanchez, E.;
Mora-Rodriguez, R. Validity of hydration non-invasive indices during the weightcutting and ofﬁcial weigh-in for Olympic
combat sports. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e95336. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

36. Perrotta, A.S.; Jeklin, A.T.; Hives, B.A.; Meanwell, L.E.; Warburton, D.E.R. Validity of the Elite HRV Smartphone Application for
Examining Heart Rate Variability in a Field-Based Setting. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2017, 31, 2296–2302. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Schaun, G.Z.; Del Vecchio, F.B. High-Intensity Interval Exercises’ Acute Impact on Heart Rate Variability: Comparison Between
Whole-Body and Cycle Ergometer Protocols. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2018, 32, 223–229. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

37.

38. Raa, A.; Sunde, G.A.; Bolann, B.; Kvale, R.; Bjerkvig, C.; Eliassen, H.S.; Wentzel-Larsen, T.; Heltne, J.K. Validation of a point-of-care

capillary lactate measuring device (Lactate Pro 2). Scand. J. Trauma Resusc. Emerg. Med. 2020, 28, 83. [CrossRef]

39. Borg, E.; Borg, G. A demonstration of level-anchored ratio scaling for prediction of grip strength. Appl. Ergon. 2013, 44, 835–840.

40.

[CrossRef]
Flint, A.; Raben, A.; Blundell, J.E.; Astrup, A. Reproducibility, power and validity of visual analogue scales in assessment of
appetite sensations in single test meal studies. Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord. 2000, 24, 38–48. [CrossRef]

41. Gleeson, M.; Greenhaff, P.L.; Maughan, R.J. Inﬂuence of a 24 h fast on high intensity cycle exercise performance in man. Eur. J.

Appl. Physiol. Occup. Physiol. 1988, 57, 653–659. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

42. Nieman, D.C.; Carlson, K.A.; Brandstater, M.E.; Naegele, R.T.; Blankenship, J.W. Running endurance in 27-h-fasted humans. J.

Appl. Physiol. 1987, 63, 2502–2509. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

43. Aziz, A.R.; Che Muhamad, A.M.; Roslan, S.R.; Ghulam Mohamed, N.; Singh, R.; Chia, M.Y.H. Poorer Intermittent Sprints
Performance in Ramadan-Fasted Muslim Footballers despite Controlling for Pre-Exercise Dietary Intake, Sleep and Training
Load. Sports 2017, 5, 4. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

44. Templeman, I.; Smith, H.A.; Chowdhury, E.; Chen, Y.C.; Carroll, H.; Johnson-Bonson, D.; Hengist, A.; Smith, R.; Creighton,
J.; Clayton, D.; et al. A randomized controlled trial to isolate the effects of fasting and energy restriction on weight loss and
metabolic health in lean adults. Sci. Transl. Med. 2021, 13, eabd8034. [CrossRef]

45. Gutierrez, A.; Gonzalez-Gross, M.; Delgado, M.; Castillo, M.J. Three days fast in sportsmen decreases physical work capacity but

not strength or perception-reaction time. Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 2001, 11, 420–429. [CrossRef]

46. Mittendorfer, B.; Horowitz, J.F.; Klein, S. Gender differences in lipid and glucose kinetics during short-term fasting. Am. J. Physiol.

Endocrinol. Metab. 2001, 281, E1333–E1339. [CrossRef]

47. Howe, S.M.; Hand, T.M.; Larson-Meyer, D.E.; Austin, K.J.; Alexander, B.M.; Manore, M.M. No Effect of Exercise Intensity on

Appetite in Highly-Trained Endurance Women. Nutrients 2016, 8, 223. [CrossRef]

48. Correia, J.M.; Santos, I.; Pezarat-Correia, P.; Minderico, C.; Mendonca, G.V. Effects of Intermittent Fasting on Speciﬁc Exercise

Performance Outcomes: A Systematic Review Including Meta-Analysis. Nutrients 2020, 12, 1390. [CrossRef]

49. Hammoud, S.; Saad, I.; Karam, R.; Abou Jaoude, F.; van den Bemt, B.J.F.; Kurdi, M. Impact of Ramadan Intermittent Fasting on
the Heart Rate Variability and Cardiovascular Parameters of Patients with Controlled Hypertension. J. Nutr. Metab. 2021, 2021,
6610455. [CrossRef]

50. Mazurak, N.; Gunther, A.; Grau, F.S.; Muth, E.R.; Pustovoyt, M.; Bischoff, S.C.; Zipfel, S.; Enck, P. Effects of a 48-h fast on heart

rate variability and cortisol levels in healthy female subjects. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2013, 67, 401–406. [CrossRef]

51. Glaister, M. Multiple sprint work : Physiological responses, mechanisms of fatigue and the inﬂuence of aerobic ﬁtness. Sports

52.

Med. 2005, 35, 757–777. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Solianik, R.; Sujeta, A.; Terentjeviene, A.; Skurvydas, A. Effect of 48 h Fasting on Autonomic Function, Brain Activity, Cognition,
and Mood in Amateur Weight Lifters. BioMed Res. Int. 2016, 2016, 1503956. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
