---
pmid: 38418370
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/38418370
title: Modeling the repetitions-in-reserve-velocity relationship - a valid method for resistance training monitoring and prescription, and fatigue management.
---

Received: 8 March 2023 

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.15955  

|  Revised: 5 February 2024 

|  Accepted: 5 February 2024

O R I G I N A L   A R T I C L E

Modeling the repetitions- in- reserve- velocity relationship: 
a valid method for resistance training monitoring and 
prescription, and fatigue management

Ivan Jukic1,2,3

  |   Katarina Prnjak4,5

  |   Eric R. Helms1  |   Michael R. McGuigan1

1Sport Performance Research Institute 
New Zealand (SPRINZ), Auckland 
University of Technology, Auckland, 
New Zealand
2School of Engineering, Computer 
and Mathematical Sciences, Auckland 
University of Technology, Auckland, 
New Zealand
3Division of Sport and Exercise 
Sciences, School of Applied Sciences, 
Abertay University, Dundee, United 
Kingdom
4School of Medicine, Western Sydney 
University, Sydney, Australia
5Graduate School of Health, University 
of Technology Sydney, Sydney, 
Australia

Correspondence
Ivan Jukic,  Sport Performance 
Research Institute New Zealand 
(SPRINZ),  Auckland University of 
Technology, 17 Antares Place, Rosedale, 
Auckland 0632, New Zealand.
Email: ivan.jukic@aut.ac.nz

Funding information
AUT Vice Chancellor's Doctoral 
Scholarship

Abstract
Establishing a relationship between repetitions left in reserve and the mean ab-

solute velocity (RIR- velocity relationship) during resistance training (RT) could 

allow  for  objective  monitoring,  prescription,  and  real- time  adjustment  of  the 

training  load  and  set- volume.  Therefore,  we  examined  the  goodness  of  fit  and 

prediction  accuracy  of  general  and  individual  RIR- velocity  relationships  in  the 

free- weight back squat exercise. The effects of sex, training status and history, as 

well as personality traits, on the goodness of fit and the accuracy of these relation-

ships were also investigated. Forty- six resistance- trained people (15 females and 

31 males) performed a one- repetition maximum (1RM) test, and two repetitions to 

failure (RTF) tests 72 h apart. We found greater goodness of fit of individual RIR- 

velocity relationships compared to general RIR- velocity relationships. Individual, 

but not general RIR- velocity relationships established in the first testing session 
yielded acceptable prediction accuracy of RIR (mean error <2 repetitions) in the 
subsequent testing session, regardless of the load used. Similar results were ob-

tained  when  both  general  and  individual  RIR- velocity  relationships  were  aver-

aged across the loads, suggesting that a single RIR- velocity relationship covering 

a range of loads can be used instead of traditional RT methods, potentially allow-

ing for better fatigue management and more efficient adaptation.

K E Y W O R D S

exercise monitoring, exercise prescription, fatigue, rating of perceived exertion, strength 
training, velocity- based training

1 

|  INTRODU CT ION

Resistance  training  (RT)  is  often  performed  by  athletes 
to  improve  muscle  strength,  power,  and  hypertrophy  as 
these  adaptations  often  coincide  with  improvements  in 
jumping, sprinting, change of direction, and sport- specific 

performance  (Suchomel  et  al.,  2016,  2018).  In  addition, 
RT  is  also  recommended  to  the  general  population  due 
to  its  profound,  positive  effects  on  physical  and  mental 
performance,  health,  and  quality  of  life  (Feigenbaum  & 
Pollock, 1999; Kraemer et al., 2002; O'Connor et al., 2010). 
Many  variables  come  into  play  when  designing  an 

This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided 
the original work is properly cited.
© 2024 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

Physiological Reports. 2024;12:e15955. 
https://doi.org/10.14814/phy2.15955

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/phy2

|  1 of 16

  
  
2 of 16 

| 

efficacious RT program such as exercise selection, order, 
frequency,  intensity,  volume,  velocity,  and  set  structure, 
among others. However, training intensity and volume re-
ceive comparably more attention from the scientific liter-
ature as the manipulation of these training variables often 
determines the magnitude of RT- induced adaptations.

RT intensity is historically prescribed by selecting the 
load relative to the individual's one- repetition maximum 
(1RM). On the contrary, RT volume is often defined as the 
number  of  sets  and  repetitions  performed  in  a  training 
session. Thus, when the number of sets for a training ses-
sion is fixed, volume is prescribed and largely determined 
by the number of repetitions performed per set (i.e., set- 
volume).  Set- volume  prescription  is  often  based  on  the 
theoretical  relationship  between  the  maximum  number 
of repetitions individuals can do with a given percentage 
of 1RM (%1RM); thus, presenting an inherent connection 
between traditional RT intensity and volume prescription. 
While  this  RT  prescription  approach  is  relatively  simple 
and ideal for implementation in practice, there are several 
limitations to it. Firstly, the 1RM test can be physically and 
psychologically demanding and time consuming and can 
also compromise the safety of an individual doing the test 
(Niewiadomski et al., 2008). Additionally, while 1RM tests 
are generally reliable (Grgic et al., 2020), changes in other 
factors that are challenging to control such as mood state 
(Rathschlag & Memmert, 2013) and multimedia exposure 
immediately  prior  to  (Cook  &  Crewther,  2012)  and  poor 
sleep (Craven et al., 2022) the day prior to testing can im-
pact  strength  performance. Thus,  if  a  1RM  test  happens 
to  be  reflective  of  abnormal  performance,  positive  or 
negative, subsequently prescribed RT intensity would be 
lighter or heavier than needed to achieve desired training 
adaptations. Likewise, even if a 1RM test does accurately 
reflect the current strength levels of an individual, using 
this test to continuously prescribe RT intensity can be er-
roneous  as  it  does  not  account  for  inherent  variation  in 
human  performance  due  to  normal  biological  and  psy-
chological variability and factors such as sleep (Bulbulian 
et al., 1996), nutrition (Helms et al., 2015), and life stress 
(Bartholomew et al., 2008), all of which can affect RT per-
formance.  Secondly,  the  maximal  number  of  repetitions 
that  can  be  completed  to  failure  with  different  exercises 
and loads varies substantially among individuals (Richens 
& Cleather, 2014). This suggests that prescribing the same 
relative load with a fixed number of repetitions will likely 
lead to heterogeneous training stimuli across individuals. 
To combat these  fundamental issues with traditional RT 
intensity  and  volume  prescription,  sport  scientists  have 
proposed  a  velocity- based  approach  to  monitoring  and 
prescribing RT programs (Weakley et al., 2020).

The  rationale  behind  a  velocity- based  approach  to 
RT  intensity  prescription  relies  on  the  strong,  inverse 

relationships  between  barbell  velocity  and  the  %1RM 
observed  in  many  multi- joint  exercises  when  individu-
als  perform  repetitions  with  maximal  intent  (Weakley 
et  al.,  2020).  Indeed,  this  relationship  is  reliable  in  both 
Smith  machine  and  free- weight  exercises  (Banyard 
et  al.,  2018;  García- Ramos  et  al.,  2019;  Pestaña- Melero 
et al., 2018), and thus useful for prescribing RT intensity 
by  adjusting  the  absolute  load  to  match  the  velocity  as-
sociated  with  the  intended  %1RM  intended  for  a  given 
training  session.  For  set- volume  prescription,  a  velocity- 
based  approach  may  also  be  beneficial  as  the  barbell 
velocity  decreases  within  a  set  when  the  exercise  is  per-
formed  with  maximal  lifting  intent  and  fatigue  ensues 
(Sánchez- Medina  &  González- Badillo,  2011).  Indeed,  a 
very close relationship between velocity loss (VL) and the 
percentage of performed repetitions out of the maximum 
possible in a set was observed for different exercises per-
formed  (González- Badillo  et  al.,  2017;  Sánchez- Moreno 
et al., 2017). According to these studies, when a 30% VL 
in  a  set  is  reached,  the  individuals  have  completed  ap-
proximately  50%  and  60%  of  the  maximum  number  of 
repetitions  in  the  Smith  machine  bench  press  and  free- 
weight  pull- up  exercise,  respectively  (González- Badillo 
et al., 2017; Sánchez- Moreno et al., 2017). Unlike the load–
velocity relationship, the relationship between VL and the 
percentage  of  completed  repetitions  suffers  from  several 
methodological  issues  (García- Ramos  et  al.,  2021;  Jukic 
et al., 2022). For instance, the exact number of repetitions 
performed, or left in reserve after completing a set remains 
unknown, and the percentage of the completed repetitions 
for  a  given  VL  could  vary  across  individuals,  exercises, 
and loads (González- Badillo et al., 2017; Rodríguez- Rosell 
et al., 2020). Thus, current velocity- based approaches offer 
advantages  for  RT  intensity  prescription  but  may  be  of 
limited use for RT volume prescription.

One  of  the  most  simplistic  ways  to  terminate  sets 
based  on  fatigue  accumulation  during  RT  is  using  the 
repetitions  in  reserve- based  rating  of  perceived  exer-
tion (RIR- based RPE) scale (Zourdos et al., 2016). More 
specifically,  individuals  could  be  instructed  to  termi-
nate sets based on the number of additional repetitions 
they believe they could complete before reaching mus-
cle failure. Thus, when the load and number of sets are 
fixed  for  a  given  session,  individuals  can  perform  rep-
etitions  until  reaching  a  predetermined  RIR  intended 
for  inducing  the  desired  training  stimulus.  Although 
this  relatively  novel  method  of  autoregulation  during 
RT  is  very  practical  and  useful,  it  may  be  problematic 
since it is subjective, such that RIR accuracy is highest 
among those with sufficient RT experience when train-
ing closer to failure with moderate- to- low repetition sets 
(Ormsbee et al., 2019; Zourdos et al., 2021). To address 
this  problem,  modeling  the  RIR- velocity  relationship 

JUKIC et al. 
 
could be useful as it combines both velocity- based and 
RIR- based  approaches  to  RT  monitoring  and  prescrip-
tion  while  relying  only  on  the  well- established  VL  in-
crease as the number of repetitions in a set increase. The 
establishment of RIR- velocity relationships may enable 
more precise daily load prescriptions and provide real- 
time insight into individuals' proximity to failure during 
training  sessions.  This  enhanced  understanding  could 
empower  coaches  and  athletes  to  exert  greater  control 
over  the  physiological  stimuli  applied  during  RT,  po-
tentially  fostering  more  targeted  and  effective  training 
adaptations.

Only two studies (García- Ramos et al., 2018; Morán- 
Navarro  et  al.,  2019)  attempted  to  establish  the  rela-
tionship  between  RIR  and  velocity.  Morán- Navarro 
et al. (2019) examined the within- individual variability 
for the velocity associated with a given number of RIR in 
the Smith  machine bench press, shoulder  press, bench 
pull,  and  back  squat.  Although  the  authors  concluded 
that velocity at a given RIR is very similar and highly re-
liable for a given exercise, noteworthy within- individual 
variability was observed, especially for the bench press 
and  shoulder  press  exercises  and  less  experienced  in-
dividuals.  Similarly,  García- Ramos  et  al.  (2018)  also 
reported  large  between- individual  variability  for  the 
velocity  at  a  given  RIR  (from  1  to  10).  Based  on  these 
findings, it seems that a RIR- velocity relationship, like a 
load–velocity  relationship,  is  highly  individual,  though 
this is yet to be confirmed. However, it is important to 
note that RIR- velocity relationships have not been estab-
lished for free- weight exercises, despite their popularity 
among  trainees,  especially  athletes.  Additionally,  little 
is  known  about  how  sex,  modeling  strategies  (e.g.,  lin-
ear  vs.  polynomial  regression  models),  training  history 
and  strength  levels  affect  the  stability  of  RIR- velocity 
relationships.  Personality  traits  such  as  emotional  sta-
bility and conscientiousness could also potentially affect 
the stability of RIR- velocity relationships as these traits 
generally affect how people cope with fatigue (De Vries 
&  Van  Heck,  2002).  Neuroticism—a  trait  on  the  oppo-
site  spectrum  of  emotional  stability—represents  the 
propensity to experience negative emotions and distress 
(Widiger,  2017),  and  as  such  may  lead  to  a  decreased 
tolerance  for  fatigue  during  exercise.  Conversely,  con-
scientiousness represents the propensity to be persistent 
and self- controlled (Widiger, 2017), and as such may en-
hance  an  individual's  ability  to  tolerate  fatigue  during 
exercise. This  could  be  particularly  relevant  during  RT 
whereby repetitions are performed with maximal intent 
and  to  (or  near)  muscle  failure.  Hypothetically,  indi-
viduals  who  score  higher  on  neuroticism  (or  lower  on 
emotional  stability)  could  have  greater  variability  in 
movement  velocity  and  associated  RIR  during  a  heavy 

|  3 of 16

RT set due to their reduced ability to cope with fatigue. 
Similarly,  performing  the  concentric  phase  of  the  lift 
with maximal intent might be another hurdle for those 
individuals. In contrast, highly conscientious individu-
als could leverage their persistence to complete the task 
while giving their absolute best, ensuring the stability of 
their  RIR- velocity  profiles.  Importantly,  the  predictive 
validity of RIR- velocity relationships—as well as factors 
affecting it—should also be examined to determine the 
usefulness  of  this  method  for  RT  monitoring  and  pre-
scription in practice. Therefore, it is evident that many 
factors related to the RIR- velocity relationship are yet to 
be explored.

To  consider  the  abovementioned  scarcity  in  the  lit-
erature,  this  study  aimed  to  (1)  examine  the  goodness 
of  fit  of  general  and  individual  RIR- velocity  relation-
ships fitted with linear and polynomial regression mod-
els  in  a  free- weight  back  squat  exercise;  (2)  determine 
the effects of sex, training status and history, as well as 
personality  traits  on  the  models'  fit;  (3)  determine  the 
ability  of  general  and  individual  RIR- velocity  relation-
ships to predict data in a subsequent testing session and 
examine  the  factors  potentially  affecting  the  accuracy 
of the predictions; and (4) determine whether the RIR- 
velocity relationship provides acceptable prediction ac-
curacy  by  averaging  velocities  of  repetitions  associated 
with RIRs that participants achieved with more than a 
single load. Based on the high interindividual variabil-
ity of velocity at different RIR reported in the previous 
two studies (García- Ramos et al., 2018; Morán- Navarro 
et al., 2019), we hypothesized greater goodness of fit for 
individual RIR- velocity relationships, whereas no other 
hypotheses were formulated due to the dearth of litera-
ture on the topic.

2 

|  METH ODS

2.1 

|  Design

This  study  is  part  of  a  larger  project  investigating  the 
validity  of  different  velocity- based  RT  monitoring  and 
prescription  methodologies.  Participants  reported  to  the 
laboratory on four occasions with 48–72 h of rest between 
the sessions. In the first session, after participants' anthro-
pometric  measures  were  taken,  participants  were  famil-
iarized  with  the  free- weight  back  squat  movement,  the 
equipment, instruments, verbal instructions to move the 
barbell up as fast as they can, and visual barbell velocity 
feedback on the TV screen. In the second session, partici-
pants performed an incremental loading (i.e., 1RM) test in 
the back squat exercise. In the final two sessions, partici-
pants  completed  repetitions  to  failure  (RTF)  tests  in  the 

JUKIC et al. 
   
4 of 16 

| 

same exercise with 90%, 80%, and 70% of their established 
1RM. All sessions were performed at the same time of the 
day for each participant (± 1 h), with the same research-
ers present, and under similar environmental conditions 
(∼20°C  and  ∼60%  humidity)  to  control  for  the  potential 
effects of these factors on performance.

2.2 

|  Participants

Fifty- one  strength- trained  people  (15  females  and  36 
males; 18–40 years of age) participated in this study. Three 
male participants withdrew from the study due to injuries 
during their work or recreational sporting activity not re-
lated to the study, whereas two male participants dropped 
out of the study due to undisclosed personal reasons after 
completing  one  and  three  experimental  sessions.  Since 
the primary aim of this study was to determine the valid-
ity  of  general  and  individual  RIR- velocity  relationships, 
only  data  from  participants  who  completed  all  sessions 
(N = 46)  were  retained  for  the  analysis.  The  1RM  in  the 
free- weight back squat exercise was 83.29 ± 19.91 kg (rela-
tive  strength = 1.25 ± 0.30)  and  149.30 ± 23.66 kg  (relative 
strength = 1.79 ± 0.35) for females and males, respectively. 
To be eligible for this study, participants had to confirm 
they (1) were willing to abstain from any additional lower- 
body  training  during  the  study;  (2)  were  not  currently 
taking  medication  that  would  alter  metabolic  or  cardio-
vascular  functions;  (3)  had  no  musculoskeletal  limita-
tions; (4) were not currently using anabolic steroids or had 
a history of use; and (5) had at least 6 months of RT expe-
rience training at least 2×/week including the back squat 
exercise  at  least  1×/week,  with  no  longer  than  2 weeks 
in a row off training during that period. Each participant 
provided written informed consent prior to commencing 
the study. The protocol of this study was approved by and 
was  in  accordance  with  the  ethical  requirements  of  the 
Auckland  University  of  Technology  Ethics  Committee 
(approval number: 20/55).

2.3 

|  Familiarization session

Participants  first  completed  a  questionnaire  related  to 
their training history and usual RT practices upon arriv-
ing to the laboratory (Appendix S1). They were also asked 
to  provide  logs  of  their  most  recent  (and  heaviest)  back 
squat sessions and to conservatively estimate their 1RM. 
This information was later used to prescribe the loads for 
familiarization with the lifting instructions and for warm- 
ups during the upcoming 1RM session. Next, participants' 
body mass and height were measured using an electronic 
column scale and a wall mounted stadiometer (Seca Ltd., 

Hamburg,  Germany).  Participants  then  completed  a 
standardized warm- up consisting of cycling at 100 rpm for 
5 min, dynamic stretching for 2 min, 10 bodyweight lunges 
and squats, as well as 10 barbell- only squats. Thereafter, 
participants were familiarized with the instruction to lift 
the barbell up as fast as they can (during the concentric 
muscle  action),  feedback  on  the  screen  indicating  veloc-
ity  of  the  barbell,  and  the  instruction  to  have  at  least  a 
momentary pause at the top of the movement not lasting 
longer than 2 s between repetitions with feet maintaining 
contact  with  the  floor  (i.e.,  no  jumping  or  lifting  of  the 
heels) at all times. To ensure familiarity with these instruc-
tions and general conditions for the 1RM and RTF tests, 
participants then completed three repetitions at 20%, 40%, 
and 60% of their estimated 1RM, and then 10 repetitions at 
60% of their estimated 1RM with at least 3 min of rest be-
tween the sets. During these repetitions, participants were 
provided the abovementioned instructions as well as vis-
ual feedback indicating the velocity of the barbell. At the 
end  of  each  session,  all  participants  understood  and  felt 
comfortable with these conditions, and performed at least 
two sets with consistent repetition velocities (± 0.02 m/s). 
Finally, participants were instructed to keep their habitual 
hydration,  nutrition,  and  caffeine  practices  before  every 
subsequent testing session the same.

|  One repetition maximum session: 

2.4 
Day 2

During the 1RM session, participants completed the same 
standardized  warm- up  as  in  the  familiarization  session. 
The  1RM  assessment  was  performed  using  a  20- kg  bar-
bell (Rogue, Columbus, Ohio, USA) and calibrated weight 
plates (Eleiko; Halmstad, Sweden, EU). The 1RM protocol 
consisted of three repetitions each at 20%, 40%, and 60%, 
and one repetition at 80%, and 90% of an estimated 1RM, 
followed  by  1RM  attempts  (Banyard  et  al.,  2018,  2020; 
Jukic et al., 2020a, 2020b). After each successful attempt, 
the load was increased in consultation with the participant 
from 1 to 12.5 kg until no further weight could be lifted or 
until movement technique was compromised. In addition, 
a maximum of five 1RM attempts were allowed for each 
participant. Three and four minutes of passive rest were 
provided between each submaximal set and 1RM attempt, 
respectively.  Participants  always  adopted  a  self- selected 
foot stance and eccentric tempo. Strong verbal encourage-
ment  and  visual  feedback  were  provided  throughout  all 
trials.  Participants  were  required  to  reach  a  squat  depth 
at which the tops of the thighs were at least parallel to the 
floor, as determined by the investigators and a camera po-
sitioned perpendicularly to the participant, for a repetition 
to be considered successful.

JUKIC et al. 
 
|  Repetitions to failure sessions: 

2.5 
Days 3 and 4

The same standardized warm- up as in the familiarization 
and 1RM sessions was performed during the RTF sessions. 
Participants then completed four sets of 10, 5, 3, and 1 rep-
etition of the free- weight back squat exercise against 30%, 
50%, 70%, and 90% of the 90% of their established 1RM (i.e., 
the heaviest load to be lifted that day), respectively. They 
were provided with 3 min of rest between warm- up sets, 
and 4 min between the last warm- up set and the first set 
to failure. After the general and specific warm- up, partici-
pants performed three sets with 90%, 80%, and 70% 1RM, 
respectively, to failure with 10 min of rest (García- Ramos 
et  al.,  2018;  Miras- Moreno  et  al.,  2022;  Pérez- Castilla 
et al., 2023) between sets. Since the excessive fatigue from 
performing a high number of repetitions during RTF with 
70% 1RM could have compromised the number of repeti-
tions performed during subsequent RTF sets with 80% and 
90%  of  1RM,  the  loads  were  not  tested  in  a  randomized 
fashion. Instead, participants always performed RTF with 
the  highest  load  (i.e.,  90%  1RM)  first  while  the  last  RTF 
set was always performed with the lowest load (i.e., 70% 
1RM). With regards to the exercise execution (including 
lifting instructions, encouragement, and visual feedback), 
the  same  conditions  applied  as  during  the  1RM  session. 
The rest between two successive RTF sessions was 72 h.

2.6 

|  Data acquisition

The  training  history  and  RT  practices  questionnaire  can 
be found in the Appendix S1. Briefly, the questions were 
related  to  the  experience  participants  have  with  RT,  in 
years, and the average (1) number of repetitions they per-
form  during  their  own  training;  (2)  intensity  of  load  at 
which  they  train;  and  (3)  number  of  RIR  they  have  left 
after completing their training sets. As the questions were 
multiple- choice;  participants'  responses  were  treated  as 
categorical. After inspecting frequencies of responses for 
each category (both overall and within levels of outcome 
variables used in models), these variables were recorded 
by  merging  some  response  options  to  avoid  having  less 
than five responses in more than 20% of cells/categories 
(Field  et  al.,  2012).  In  particular,  the  number  of  repeti-
tions performed was transformed into a categorical vari-
able  with  three  levels  (1–5,  5–8,  and  >8),  as  well  as  was 
the intensity of load (<70, 70–80, and 80–90), whereas the 
number  of  RIR  and  the  experience  with  RT  were  trans-
formed into categorical variables with two levels (0–2 and 
2–4; ≤3 and >3, respectively).

|  5 of 16

Performance  Technologies,  Canberra,  Australia)  linear 
position  transducer  (LPT).  An  LPT  was  placed  on  both 
sides of the barbell perpendicular to the position between 
the hands and the loaded barbell sleeves, according to the 
manufacturer's instructions. The reliability and validity of 
this LPT have been previously confirmed and its charac-
teristics described elsewhere (Banyard et al., 2017; Orange 
et al., 2020). Data obtained from the LPT were transmitted 
via Bluetooth to a tablet (iPad, Apple Inc., California, USA) 
using the GymAware v2.8.0 app. LPT attached to the right 
side of the barbell was connected to the TV and provided 
visual  feedback  indicating  velocity  of  the  barbell  after 
each repetition. The data from this LPT was used for the 
analysis. Finally, to avoid any data loss due to issues with 
online  clouds  or  the  internet  connection,  mean  velocity 
of all repetitions were manually recorded and organized 
in a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet (Microsoft Corporation, 
Redmond, Washington, USA) during each session. To en-
sure consistency and accuracy of this procedure, the same 
two researchers handled this task throughout the study.

International  Personality  Item  Pool  (IPIP)  Big  Five 
Personality  Inventory  was  used  to  assess  stable  person-
ality  traits,  namely,  Agreeableness,  Conscientiousness, 
Extraversion,  Neuroticism,  and  Openness 
(Ehrhart 
et  al.,  2008;  Goldberg,  1992).  The  inventory  contains  50 
statements (items), 10 for each of the mentioned Big Five 
personality  dimensions  which  were  administered  using 
the  Qualtrics  survey- building  software.  Participants  had 
to estimate how well each statement describes them using 
a 5- point Likert- type scale ranging from 1 (very inaccurate) 
to 5 (very accurate). Scores were averaged across items to 
obtain total scores for each of the five personality dimen-
sions.  For  the  purposes  of  the  present  study,  only  con-
scientiousness  and  emotional  stability  were  used  in  the 
analysis.

2.7 

|  Statistical analysis

Linear  and  second  order  polynomial  regression  models 
were  used  to  fit  the  general  and  individual  RIR- velocity 
relationships. General RIR- velocity relationships were es-
tablished  separately  for  each  load  and  testing  session  by 
pooling  together  the  data  from  all  participants,  whereas 
individual  relationships  were  determined  for  each  par-
ticipant separately, on both testing sessions and with each 
load. The goodness of fit of general relationships was ex-
amined through the coefficient of determination (R2) and 
residual standard error (RSE) of the models, whereas me-
dians and ranges of R2 and RSE were evaluated for indi-
vidual RIR- velocity relationships.

In  this  study,  mean  velocity  of  all  repetitions  was 
monitored  using  the  GymAware  (GymAware,  Kinetic 

Linear mixed- effects models with the Gaussian condi-
tional distribution and identity link function were used to 

JUKIC et al. 
   
6 of 16 

| 

examine factors influencing the goodness of fit of individ-
ual RIR- velocity relationships. For this purpose, the load 
(3  levels),  training  experience  (2  levels)  and  practices  (2 
or  3  levels),  relative  strength  and  conscientiousness  and 
emotional stability were all considered as fixed effects.

The  predictive  validity  of  the  general  and  individual 
VL- %repetitions  relationships  was  examined  by  using  the 
models from the first testing session (i.e., a general model 
with  all  participants'  data  pooled  and  individual  models 
of  each  participant)  and  fitting  them  to  the  data  of  the 
second testing session. Thereafter, general, and individual 
models' errors were evaluated by calculating an absolute 
difference  between  the  observed  and  predicted  data  in 
the second testing session. Models' absolute error of less 
than one repetition was deemed excellent, 1–2 repetitions 
acceptable, and more than two repetitions error not use-
ful for monitoring and prescribing RT. This decision was 
made given the existence of other well- established, cost- 
free  methods  of  monitoring  and  prescribing  RT,  such  as 
stopping  sets  at  a  predetermined  perceived  number  of 
RIR (Halperin et al., 2021). To examine factors which in-
fluenced  the  absolute  differences  between  observed  and 
predicted data, linear mixed- effects models were used, as 
previously described. Finally, to confirm the robustness of 
these  findings,  generalized  linear  mixed- effects  models, 
with  a  binomial  conditional  distribution  and  logit  link 
function, were also used to examine factors affecting the 
probability of not exceeding an absolute prediction error 
of two repetitions.

For all mixed models, participants (n = 46) were treated 
as random effects to control for repeated measurements, 
and the general variation between participants. Since both 
fixed and random effects were used, restricted maximum 
likelihood estimation was used for evaluation of the linear 
mixed- effects models whereas maximum likelihood, with 
Laplace approximation, estimation was used for general-
ized linear mixed- effects models. The contribution of both 
fixed and random effects to the explanatory power of any of 
the explored models was examined using a likelihood ratio 
test, deviance statistic, and Akaike Information Criterion 
score, before selecting the final model to obtain the best 
fit while maintaining model parsimony. Importantly, the 
reduction of the model structure was always theoretically 
motivated  and  was  done  as  a  last  resort.  The  statistical 
significance of fixed effects was examined by t- tests based 
on  the  Satterthwaite  approximation  or  Wald  Z- tests  for 
linear mixed- effects and generalized linear mixed- effects 
models, respectively. For linear mixed- effects models, pre-
dictors' estimates and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) 
were  calculated  and  presented  whereas  for  generalized 
mixed- effects models odds ratios with associated 95% CI 
were evaluated and presented to aid the interpretation of 
the  findings.  For  categorical  predictors  with  more  than 

two  levels,  post  hoc  tests  were  performed  with  Holm- 
Bonferroni correction. More details on models' specifica-
tion and diagnostics can be found in Appendix S2.

To  explore  whether  RIR- velocity  relationships  could 
be  further  simplified,  both  general  and  individual  RIR- 
velocity  relationships  were  also  established  by  averaging 
velocities of repetitions associated with RIRs that partici-
pants achieved with more than a single load. For instance, 
if an individual performed 5, 10, and 15 repetitions with 
90%, 80%, and 70% of 1RM, respectively, velocities of RIRs 
from 1 to 5 and 6 to 10 were averaged across three and two 
loads,  respectively.  Thereafter,  their  goodness  of  fit  and 
prediction  validity  was  assessed  as  previously  described 
for RIR- velocity relationships for each load separately.

All statistical analyses were performed in R language 
and environment for statistical computing (version 4.2.0, 
The  R  foundation  for  Statistical  Computing,  Vienna, 
Austria)  using  the  lme4  (Bates  et  al.,  2015)  and  ggeffects 
(Lüdecke,  2018a)  packages,  models'  performance  using 
the  performance  and  DHARMa  (Hartig,  2020)  packages, 
and  preparation  and  visualization  of  data  using  the  ti-
dyverse (Wickham et al., 2019) and sjPlot (Lüdecke, 2018b) 
packages. Custom- written R script and associated dataset 
are  available  at  the  Open  Science  Framework  repository 
(URL: https:// osf. io/ 5ejcp/  ).

3 

|   RESULTS

The goodness of fit for the general RIR- velocity relation-
ship across loads and testing sessions was generally strong 
and  almost  identical  for  both  linear  and  second  order 
polynomial  regression  models  (Figure  1).  However,  the 
goodness of fit of the individual relationships was always 
stronger (Figure 2), regardless of the load, testing session, 
and regression model.

The  goodness  of  fit  of  individual  RIR- velocity  rela-
tionships was affected by testing session, model type, and 
training experience (Table 1). R2 was higher in the second 
testing session (p < 0.001), when the second order polyno-
mial regression model was used (p < 0.001), and with 90% 
(p = 0.030) and 80% (p = 0.030) compared to 70% of 1RM 
load (Appendix S3). RSE was higher in the second testing 
session (p < 0.001), as the load decreased from 90% to 70% 
1RM  (p < 0.001)  and  among  less  experienced  individuals 
(p = 0.035).

Predictive  validity  of  the  general  RIR- velocity  rela-
tionship was acceptable for 80% and 90% but not for 70% 
of  1RM  (Appendix  S4).  Regardless  of  the  load  used  and 
whether  linear  or  polynomial  models  were  fitted  to  the 
data,  the  predictive  validity  of  individual  RIR- velocity 
relationships  was  always  acceptable  since  the  absolute 
error between observed and predicted data on the second 

JUKIC et al. 
 
70% 1RM

80% 1RM

90% 1RM

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.51

3.38

0.52

3.38

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.49

3.47

0.49

3.47

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.57

2.09

0.57

2.09

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.47

2.45

0.48

2.44

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.5

1.14

0.5

1.14

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.45

1.28

0.45

1.28

|  7 of 16

Day

Day 1

Day 2

D
a
y

1

D
a
y

2

25

20

15

10

5

0

e
v
r
e
s
e
r
n

i

t
f
e

l

25

s
n
o
i
t
i
t
e
p
e
R

20

15

10

5

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Mean velocity (m/s)

F I G U R E   1  A general relationship between repetitions left in reserve and mean absolute velocity fitted with linear (red line) and second 
order polynomial regression (light blue line) models. Coefficient of determination (R2), as well as residual standard errors (RSE), are also 
presented for both linear (in red) and second order polynomial regression (in light blue) models.

testing  session—while  using  the  data  of  the  first  testing 
session to make predictions—was always lower than two 
repetitions  (Figure  3;  Appendix  S3).  The  linear  mixed- 
effects  model  investigating  factors  affecting  absolute 
differences  between  observed  and  predicted  data  on  the 
second  testing  session  revealed  only  load  was  an  influ-
ential factor (Table 2), with absolute errors decreasing as 
the  load  increased  (p < 0.001).  Similarly,  the  generalized 
linear mixed- effects model examining factors affecting the 
probability of not exceeding an absolute prediction error 
of two repetitions revealed load, sex, and number of repe-
titions typically performed per set were influential factors 
(Table 2). Specifically, the probability of exceeding the two 
repetitions prediction error linearly decreased as the load 
increased (p < 0.001), was greater for females than males 
(p = 0.003),  and  greater  among  participants  who  usually 
completed  more  than  12  repetitions  compared  to  those 
who usually performed less than eight repetitions during 
their own training (p = 0.04; Appendix S3).

When  the  overlapping  RIRs  across  sets  performed  to 
failure  with  different  loads  were  averaged,  general  and 
individual RIR- velocity relationships' goodness of fit was 
generally comparable to relationships fitted for each load 
separately  (Figure  4;  Appendix  S5).  Similarly,  the  good-
ness of fit of individual RIR- velocity relationships was af-
fected by the same factors as previously reported—apart 
from training experience which was not a significant pre-
dictor  in  these  models—for  relationships  established  for 
each load separately (Appendix S5). The predictive valid-
ity of individual but not general RIR- velocity relationships 
averaged  across  loads  was  acceptable,  with  comparable 
prediction  errors  for  both  linear  and  polynomial  models 
(Appendix  S5).  Finally,  models  investigating  factors  af-
fecting  the  predictive  validity  of  individual  RIR- velocity 
relationships averaged across loads revealed only habitual 
repetitions practices were influential factors, similar to the 
results reported for RIR- velocity relationships established 
for each load separately (Appendix S5).

JUKIC et al. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
70% 1RM

80% 1RM

90% 1RM

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.95
1.12
0.99
0.62

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.98
0.7
0.99
0.65

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.94
1.19
0.96
0.97

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.96
0.65
0.98
0.48

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.99
0.41
0.99
0.39

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.99
0.23
0.98
0.48

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

1
0.05
0.96
0.47

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.98
0.29
1
0.13

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.99
0.2
0.99
0.21

1
1

Day

1
2

Day 1

Day 2

1
4

8 of 16 

| 

20

15

10

5

0

20

15

e
v
r
e
s
e
r
n

i

t
f
e

l

10

s
n
o
i
t
i
t
e
p
e
R

5

0

20

15

10

5

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.6
Mean velocity (m/s)

0.2

0.4

0.6

Individual relationships between repetitions left in reserve and mean absolute velocity fitted with second order polynomial 

F I G U R E   2 
regression models for representative participants. Coefficient of determination (R2) as well as residual standard errors (RSE) are also 
presented for both testing sessions.

4 

|  DISCUSSIO N

To our knowledge, this is the first study that examined the 
goodness of fit and prediction accuracy of general and in-
dividual RIR- velocity relationships in a free- weight back 
squat exercise while also exploring the effects of modeling 
strategies, sex, training status and history, as well as per-
sonality  traits  on  goodness  of  fit  and  accuracy  of  those 
relationships.  The  main  findings  of  this  study  were  (1) 
individual rather than general RIR- velocity relationships 
yielded a higher goodness of fit for all loads and on both 
testing sessions; (2) goodness of fit for both individual and 
general relationships was higher among more experienced 
compared to less experienced individuals and with higher 
(i.e.,  90%  and  80%  1RM)  compared  to  lower  loads  (i.e., 
70% 1RM), but was not affected by sex, training practices 

nor  personality  traits;  (3)  for  individual  RIR- velocity  re-
lationships,  second  order  polynomial  regression  models 
yielded a better goodness of fit compared to linear models 
whereas both regression models fit the data equally well 
for  the  general  RIR- velocity  relationship;  (4)  individual, 
but  not  general,  RIR- velocity  relationships  displayed  ac-
ceptable  RSE,  regardless  of  the  load  or  testing  session; 
(5)  individual  RIR- velocity  relationships  established  in 
the  first  testing  session  always  provided  acceptable  pre-
dictions  of  RIR  in  the  second  testing  session,  regardless 
of  the  load,  whereas  general  RIR- velocity  relationships 
yielded  acceptable  prediction  errors  only  with  80%  and 
90% 1RM loads; (6) prediction accuracy was only affected 
by  sex  and  habitual  repetition  practices  in  models  from 
males, and those performing less than 12 repetitions dur-
ing their own training, having a slightly lower prediction 

JUKIC et al. 
 
 
 
 
|  9 of 16

p

0.056

<0.001

0.056

0.076

<0.001

<0.001

0.130

0.730

0.035

0.627

0.679

0.691

0.328

0.728

0.284

T A B L E   1  Factors affecting the goodness of fit of individual RIR- velocity relationships.

R2

Estimates

CI

Predictors

(Intercept)

Day [Day 2]

Polynomial model

Sex [male]

Load [80% 1RM]

Load [90% 1RM]

Emotional Stability

Conscientiousness

Training experience [>3 years]

Habitual loads [70–80% 1RM]

Habitual loads [>80% 1RM]

Habitual repetitions [8–12]

Habitual repetitions [>12]

2
σ

τ00 ID

ICC

N ID

Observations
Marginal R2/Conditional R2

Habitual repetitions in reserve [>2 RIR]

0.02

Relative strength (1RM/BM)

−0.04

Random Effects

0.77 to 1.16

−0.04 to −0.01

0.02 to 0.05

−0.02 to 0.10

0.00 to 0.04

0.01 to 0.04

−0.00 to 0.00

−0.01 to 0.00

−0.00 to 0.09

−0.04 to 0.07

−0.03 to 0.11

−0.03 to 0.08

−0.06 to 0.06

−0.03 to 0.06

−0.10 to 0.03

p

<0.001

0.007

<0.001

0.234

0.017

0.009

0.432

0.315

0.071

0.613

0.234

0.403

0.987

0.490

0.253

RSE

Estimates

CI

−0.02 to 1.85

0.05 to 0.17

−0.12 to 0.00

−0.55 to 0.03

−0.65 to −0.51

−0.93 to −0.78

−0.00 to 0.03

−0.01 to 0.02

−0.46 to −0.02

−0.36 to 0.21

−0.39 to 0.25

−0.30 to 0.20

−0.14 to 0.42

−0.19 to 0.26

−0.14 to 0.49

0.91

0.11

−0.06

−0.26

−0.58

−0.86

0.01

0.00

−0.24

−0.07

−0.07

−0.05

0.14

0.04

0.17

0.12

0.09

0.42

46

524

0.97

−0.02

0.03

0.04

0.02

0.03

−0.00

−0.00

0.04

0.02

0.04

0.02

−0.00

0.01

0.00

0.30

46

552

0.139/0.393

0.458/0.686

Note: Reference groups were the following: Load [70% 1RM], sex [female], training experience [<3 years], habitual loads [< 70% 1RM], habitual repetitions [<8 
repetitions], and habitual repetitions in reserve [<2 RIR]. Number of observations for the RSE model is lower than for the R2 model as some polynomial model 
with 90% of 1RM resulted in no error (i.e., perfect fit due to the minimum number of data points, ~ 3). These observations were automatically discarded by the 
model.
Abbreviations: 1RM, one repetition maximum; BM, body mass; CI, 95% confidence intervals; ICC, intraclass correlation coefficient; p, p value; R2, coefficient of 
determination; RIR, repetitions in reserve; RSE, residual standard error.

accuracy; and (7) goodness of fit and prediction accuracy 
of  individual  RIR- velocity  relationships  averaged  across 
loads were comparable to the ones observed for the rela-
tionships established for each load separately. Therefore, 
these findings support the use of individual RIR- velocity 
relationships  for  free- weight  RT  monitoring  and  pre-
scription,  potentially  improving  adaptation  and  fatigue 
management.

Instead of prescribing a given, fixed number of repeti-
tions per set, some authors recommended that each train-
ing set should be terminated when a given VL is reached 
due to a strong relationship that exists between VL and the 
percentage of performed repetitions out of the maximum 
possible for different Smith machine exercises (González- 
Badillo  et  al.,  2017).  However,  more  recently  research-
ers  reported  methodological  issues  with  this  concept 
with  implications  for  RT  volume  prescription  (García- 
Ramos et al., 2021). For instance, even if a percentage of 

completed  repetitions  out  of  the  maximum  possible  can 
be determined based on VL experienced in a set, the exact 
number of RIR remains unknown. This is important since 
the  last  repetitions  of  a  set  contribute  more  to  the  alter-
ation  of  muscle  energy  balance  and  the  abrupt  increase 
in  metabolites  (Gorostiaga  et  al.,  2012,  2014;  Sánchez- 
Medina  &  González- Badillo,  2011).  A  very  practical 
approach to monitoring RIR is through the use of the RIR- 
based RPE scale (Helms et al., 2016) whereby individuals 
estimate how many additional repetitions they could have 
performed  after  finishing  a  training  set.  However,  this 
method  is  subjective,  and  its  accuracy  can  depend  upon 
prior RT experience and is less accurate when training far-
ther from failure and with moderate- to- high repetition sets 
(Ormsbee et al., 2019; Zourdos et al., 2021). To address this 
problem, García- Ramos et al. (2018) formally established 
the general RIR- velocity relationship in a Smith machine 
bench press exercise whereas Morán- Navarro et al. (2019) 

JUKIC et al. 
   
10 of 16 

| 

Individual relationships between repetitions left in reserve and mean absolute velocity established with the second 

F I G U R E   3 
order polynomial regression in the first testing session (line) and fitted to the data of the second testing session (dots). Thin vertical lines 
connecting thick lines and dots across participants represent distances (or residual errors) between predicted and observed data. Mean 
(mean ε), minimal (min ε), and maximal (max ε) errors are also presented for each participant and load. This data is from representative 
participants where models' prediction errors never exceeded a two repetitions error mark.

examined velocities associated with 2, 4, 6, and 8 RIR in 
several  Smith  machine  exercises.  Both  research  groups 
observed  some  variability—expressed  with  coefficients 
of  variation—in  velocities  associated  with  different  RIR 
which was especially noticeable for upper body exercises 
(García- Ramos et al., 2018; Morán- Navarro et al., 2019) and 
less experienced individuals (Morán- Navarro et al., 2019). 
In agreement with their observations, the goodness of fit 
for individual RIR- velocity relationships was considerably 
greater  in  the  present  study,  with  R2  values  being  twice 
as  high  for  individual  compared  to  general  RIR- velocity 
relationships  in  the  free- weight  back  squat.  The  current 
study also aimed to examine factors affecting the goodness 
of  fit  of  individual  RIR- velocity  relationships.  Only  the 

load and training experience affected the goodness of fit, 
with  less  experienced  individuals'  RIR- velocity  relation-
ships  having  a  lower  RSE  (p = 0.035;  Table  1)  compared 
to more experienced people. In addition, RIR- velocity re-
lationships  with  greater  loads  generally  displayed  lower 
RSE  (p < 0.001;  Table  1).  However,  it  should  be  noted 
that  the  median  RSE  for  less  experienced  individuals 
(RSE ≤1.67)  and  RIR- velocity  relationships  with  lower 
loads (RSE ≤1.18) was still generally low (even lower when 
fitted  with  polynomial  regression  models)  and  compara-
ble to more experienced people which was also mirrored 
by similar R2 values for the models fit. Considering this, 
and the lack of significant effects from training status, his-
tory,  and  personality  traits  on  the  stability  of  individual 

JUKIC et al. 
 
T A B L E   2  Factors affecting the (1) the absolute differences between predicted and observed RIR in a subsequent testing session based 
on individual RIR- velocity relationships; and (2) the probability of individual RIR- velocity relationships exceeding a prediction error of two 
repetitions.

|  11 of 16

Predictors

(Intercept)

Sex [male]

Polynomial model

Load [80% 1RM]

Load [90% 1RM]

Emotional stability

Conscientiousness

Training experience [>3 years]

Habitual repetitions [8–12]

Habitual repetitions [>12]

Habitual loads [70%–80% 1RM]

Habitual loads [>80% 1RM]

Habitual repetitions in reserve [>2 RIR]

Random effects

2

σ

τ00 ID

ICC

N ID

Observations
Marginal R2/Conditional R2

Absolute differences

Estimates

CI

−0.32 to 2.53

−0.74 to 0.17

−0.13 to 0.07

−0.52 to 0.30

−0.95 to −0.67

−0.02 to 0.04

−0.02 to 0.05

−0.55 to 0.34

−0.51 to 0.51

−0.00 to 1.13

−0.31 to 0.82

−0.54 to 0.77

−0.32 to 0.59

1.10

−0.29

−0.03

−0.41

−0.81

0.01

0.01

−0.11

0.00

0.56

0.26

0.12

0.14

1.70

0.37

0.18

46

2607

Exceeding the error

CI

0.00–0.25

0.14–0.67

0.80–1.16

0.51–0.77

0.17–0.33

0.99–1.08

0.99–1.09

0.42–1.43

0.63–2.55

1.23–5.74

0.42–1.95

0.48–2.79

0.64–2.18

p

0.002

0.003

0.714

<0.001

<0.001

0.151

0.095

0.424

0.508

0.013

0.787

0.747

0.593

p

0.130

0.215

0.580

<0.001

<0.001

0.697

0.462

0.633

0.992

0.051

0.371

0.723

0.552

OR

0.02

0.30

0.97

0.63

0.24

1.03

1.04

0.78

1.27

2.65

0.90

1.16

1.18

3.29

0.61

0.16

46

2607

0.099/0.261

0.147/0.281

Note: Reference groups were the following: Load [70% 1RM], sex [female], training experience [<3 years], habitual loads [<70% 1RM], habitual repetitions [<8 
repetitions], and habitual repetitions in reserve [<2 RIR].
Abbreviations: 1RM, one repetition maximum; BM, body mass; CI, 95% confidence intervals; OR, odds ratio; p, p value; R2, coefficient of determination; RIR, 
repetitions in reserve; RIR- velocity relationship, relationships between repetitions in reserve and their mean velocity; RSE, residual standard error.

RIR- velocity relationships, these findings could likely be 
generalized  to  the  resistance- trained  population  using 
free- weight exercises.

To  gauge  the  practical  usefulness  of  RIR- velocity  re-
lationships,  their  predictive  validity  must  be  evaluated. 
Thus, the present study investigated the ability of general 
and  individual  RIR- velocity  relationships  established  in 
an  initial  testing  session  to  predict  RIR  in  a  subsequent 
testing  session.  Despite  comparatively  weak  goodness  of 
fit  of  general  RIR- velocity  relationships,  their  predictive 
validity was unacceptable only for 70% of 1RM (>2 repe-
titions). In contrast, regardless of the load and modeling 
strategy  used,  individual  RIR- velocity  relationships  dis-
played  lower,  acceptable  mean  prediction  errors.  These 
prediction errors of individual RIR- velocity relationships 
were affected by sex, load, and habitual repetitions prac-
tices (Table 2). While examination of prediction errors by 
sex and load in isolation always yielded mean prediction 
errors lower than two repetitions, females tended to have 
slightly  higher  prediction  errors  than  the  predetermined 

criteria  with  lower  loads.  Perhaps,  the  fact  that  females 
had somewhat lower relative strength than males in this 
study  could  partially  explain  slightly  higher  prediction 
errors. Additionally, individuals who typically performed 
more  than  12  repetitions  during  their  own  training  had 
higher than two repetitions prediction errors with 70% of 
1RM. This  suggests  that  the  accuracy  of  individual  RIR- 
velocity relationships might be slightly compromised with 
lower  loads  (e.g.,  70%  1RM),  especially  with  individuals 
who usually perform many repetitions during their train-
ing sets. It may be that those individuals generally possess 
a  greater  variability  in  performance  for  reasons  unex-
plored in the present study. Finally, it should be noted that 
polynomial regression models should be used to maximize 
prediction accuracy. Nevertheless, individual, but not gen-
eral RIR- velocity relationships always demonstrated high 
goodness of fit and acceptable accuracy and thus can be 
used for RT monitoring and prescription.

Despite  acceptable  mean  prediction  accuracy  being 
observed for individual RIR- velocity relationships in the 

JUKIC et al. 
   
12 of 16 

| 

(a)

20

e
v
r
e
s
e
r
n

i

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.58

3.15

0.58

3.14

Day 1

Day 2

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.56

3.21

0.57

3.2

t
f
e
l

s
n
o
i
t
i
t
e
p
e
R

10

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Mean velocity (m/s)

11

12

14

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.92

1.43

0.99

0.58

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.98

0.74

0.98

0.78

R2:
RSE:
R2:
RSE:

0.91

1.45

0.98

0.64

(b)

20

15

e
v
r
e
s
e
r
n

i

t
f
e
l

10

s
n
o
i
t
i
t
e
p
e
R

5

0

Day

Day 1

Day 2

Day

Day 1

Day 2

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.6

Mean velocity (m/s)

F I G U R E   4  General relationship (a) between repetitions left in reserve and mean absolute velocity fitted with linear (red line) and 
second order polynomial regression (light blue line) models. Individual relationships (b) between repetitions left in reserve and mean 
absolute velocity fitted with second order polynomial regression models for representative participants. Velocities associated with different 
repetitions left in reserve were averaged across 70%, 80%, and 90% of 1RM for both general (a) and individual (b) relationships in this figure. 
Coefficient of determination (R2), as well as residual standard errors (RSE), are also presented for both testing sessions and relationships.

present study, it is important to note that models' predic-
tion  errors  might  not  be  acceptable  for  all  individuals, 
or  RIRs  thereof.  For  instance,  Figure  3  illustrates  four 
individuals whose models' prediction errors were on av-
erage  almost  perfect  (~ 1  repetition).  However,  a  maxi-
mal  prediction  error  for  individual  RIR  should  also  be 
appreciated  from  the  figure.  This  is  important  as  only 

focusing  on  the  mean  error  across  different  RIRs  can 
hide the inability of the model to accurately predict the 
entire RIR- velocity spectrum. Furthermore, a thorough 
inspection of the descriptive data of average prediction 
errors revealed that females, less strong individuals, and 
those with less than 3 years of RT experience, tended to 
have slightly higher mean prediction errors compared to 

JUKIC et al. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their respective counterparts (Appendix S4). Therefore, 
individual  RIR- velocity  relationships  should  be  evalu-
ated, and their usefulness determined on a case- by- case 
basis,  with  special  attention  given  to  less  experienced 
and weaker individuals.

The present study also attempted to evaluate both gen-
eral  and  individual  RIR- velocity  relationships  averaged 
across the loads. For this purpose, velocities of overlapping 
RIR (i.e., different RIR not unique across the three loads 
used  in  this  study)  were  averaged  to  examine  whether 
such RIR- velocity relationship could yield high goodness 
of fit and acceptable prediction accuracy. Indeed, with ve-
locities associated with overlapping RIRs averaged across 
loads  both  general  and  individual  RIR- velocity  relation-
ships' goodness of fit (Figure 4) was generally comparable 
to relationships fitted for each load separately (Figure 1; 
Figure  2).  Similarly,  the  predictive  validity  of  individual 
but not general RIR- velocity relationships averaged across 
loads was acceptable, with comparable prediction errors 
for  both  linear  and  polynomial  models  (Appendix  S5). 
Finally, the results of the models investigating factors af-
fecting both goodness of fit and predictive validity of in-
dividual RIR- velocity relationships averaged across loads 
were similar to results reported for RIR- velocity relation-
ships established for each load separately (Appendix S5). 
Therefore,  the  process  of  establishing  and  using  RIR- 
velocity relationships in practice could further be simpli-
fied by establishing a single relationship which covers a 
range  of  loads  (i.e.,  70%–90%  of  1RM),  rather  than  hav-
ing a profile for each load separately. This opens another 
possibility of using individual RIR- velocity relationships 
which  goes  beyond  set  termination  and  equating  for  ef-
fort across individuals when prescribing RT. For example, 
a  training  program  could  call  for  three  sets  of  six  repe-
titions  at  2RIR  rather  than  assigning  a  percentage  (e.g., 
85% of 1RM) to the prescribed repetitions. Then, the load 
could  be  selected  based  on  the  “starting  velocity”  (i.e., 
the velocity associated with 6RIR) and the set terminated 
when the velocity associated with 2RIR is reached (i.e., a 
“stopping  velocity”).  Furthermore,  this  approach  allows 
for autoregulation of training loads which can be adjusted 
for  subsequent  sets  (or  workouts)  to  meet  the  training 
goal; this is important when considering possible day- to- 
day variations in performance. Essentially, the proposed 
ways in which RIR- based RPE can be used to autoregu-
late load selection and set termination (Helms et al., 2016; 
Ormsbee  et  al.,  2019)  can  also  be  performed  using  indi-
vidual RIR- velocity relationships, but with greater accu-
racy, especially among individuals who may be worse at 
subjectively gauging RIR. Therefore, the individual RIR- 
velocity relationship can be used in lieu of traditional RT 
methods to monitor, prescribe, and adjust both the train-
ing load and set- volume more accurately.

|  13 of 16

The  present  study  comprehensively  examined  the 
goodness  of  fit  and  predictive  validity  of  RIR- velocity 
relationships  for  monitoring  and  prescribing  RT  while 
also  exploring  the  effects  of  a  range  of  factors  on  these 
relationships. However, there are several considerations 
worth noting when interpreting the results. First, it is un-
known whether the findings of the present study extend 
beyond free weight squats and transfer to other exercises. 
However,  even  if  other  exercises  prove  less  or  more  re-
liable, it is likely that the effects of training history and 
status,  sex,  and  personality  are  similar  across  exercises. 
Second, all participants in the present study had at least 
6 months  of  RT  experience,  so  the  extent  to  which  the 
current findings translate to those without RT experience 
is  unknown.  Third,  the  number  of  females  included  in 
the  analysis  was  considerably  lower  than  males,  so  the 
male data may be more generalizable. With that said, the 
females in the present study had a wide range of strength 
levels,  training  experience,  and  habitual  training  prac-
tices,  possibly  improving  the  sample's  generalizabil-
ity.  Finally,  it  is  important  to  highlight  that  a  different 
choice  for  the  acceptable  repetition  error  threshold  for 
the RIR- velocity relationships could have influenced the 
findings  and  subsequent  interpretation.  However,  a  RT 
monitoring and prescription method with higher than a 
two repetitions error, especially one that has a financial 
cost, may not be justified in practical settings, given this 
would  be  higher  than  the  average  error  of  subjectively 
rated RIR in most cases (Halperin et al., 2021).

5 

|  CONCLUSIO N

The  present  study  is  the  first  to  thoroughly  examine  the 
utility of general and individual RIR- velocity relationships 
with  free- weight  exercises.  Regardless  of  the  load  and 
modeling strategy used, individualized RIR- velocity rela-
tionships provided twice as high goodness of fit and were 
always  able  to  predict  RIR  in  a  subsequent  testing  ses-
sion  with  acceptable  accuracy  compared  to  general  RIR- 
velocity  relationships.  Females,  less  strong  individuals, 
and those with less than 3 years of RT experience tended 
to have slightly higher mean prediction errors compared 
to their respective counterparts. However, the prediction 
error for females was only slightly higher with respect to 
the  predetermined  criteria,  and  only  present  with  lower 
loads.  Therefore,  individual  RIR- velocity  relationships 
should be evaluated, and their usefulness determined on 
a  case- by- case  basis,  with  special  attention  given  to  less 
experienced  and  weaker  individuals.  Using  RIR- velocity 
relationships  in  practice  could  further  be  simplified  by 
establishing a single relationship which covers a range of 
loads (i.e., 70% to 90% of 1RM), rather than having a profile 

JUKIC et al. 
   
14 of 16 

| 

for each load separately. This allows selection of the loads 
based on the “starting velocity” (i.e., the velocity associated 
with  an indented  load that can be lifted a  given  number 
of times) and termination of the sets when the “stopping 
velocity”  (i.e.,  velocity  associated  with  an  intended  RIR) 
is  reached.  Therefore,  the  individual  RIR- velocity  rela-
tionship can be used in lieu of traditional RT methods to 
monitor, prescribe, and adjust both the training load and 
set- volume more accurately, potentially allowing for more 
efficient adaptation and better fatigue management.

AUTHOR  CONTRIBUTIONS
IJ,  MRM,  and  ERH  designed  the  study.  IJ  and  KP  con-
ducted the study. IJ performed all the analyses, visualized 
the data, and wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All 
authors edited and revised the manuscript and approved 
the final version of the manuscript.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Andrew King and Colby 
Sousa for their assistance with data collection, and all par-
ticipants for their time and effort. Open access publishing 
facilitated by Auckland University of Technology, as part of 
the Wiley -  Auckland University of Technology agreement 
via the Council of Australian University Librarians.

FUNDI NG INFOR MAT ION
I.J. was supported by the AUT Vice Chancellor's Doctoral 
Scholarship. No other sources of funding were used in the 
preparation of this manuscript. Open Access funding ena-
bled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions.

DATA  AVA ILABIL IT Y STAT EME N T
The dataset and analysis code scripts are available at the 
Open Science Framework (URL: https:// osf. io/ 5ejcp/  ).

ETHICS STATEMENT
The protocol of this study was approved by and was in ac-
cordance with the ethical requirements of the Auckland 
University  of  Technology  Ethics  Committee  (approval 
number:  20/55).  All  methods  were  conducted  in  strict 
adherence  to  the  Code  of  Ethics  of  the  World  Medical 
Association (Declaration of Helsinki).

ORCID
Ivan Jukic 
Katarina Prnjak 
Michael R. McGuigan 
org/0000-0002-1251-7838 

 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0900-9410 

 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6152-5025 

 https://orcid.

R E F E R E N C E S
Banyard, H. G., Nosaka, K., Sato, K., & Haff, G. G. (2017). Validity of 
various methods for determining velocity, force, and power in 

the back squat. International Journal of Sports Physiology and 
Performance, 12(9), 1170–1176.

Banyard, H. G., Nosaka, K., Vernon, A. D., & Haff, G. G. (2018). The 
reliability of individualized load–velocity profiles. International 
Journal of Sports Physiology and Performance, 13(6), 763–769.

Banyard,  H.  G.,  Tufano,  J.  J.,  Weakley,  J.  J.  S.,  Wu,  S.,  Jukic,  I.,  & 
Nosaka,  K.  (2020).  Superior  changes  in  jump,  sprint,  and 
change- of- direction  performance  but  not  maximal  strength 
training  compared 
following  6 weeks  of  velocity- based 
with 
training. 
1- repetition- maximum 
International  Journal  of  Sports  Physiology  and  Performance, 
16(2), 232–242.

percentage- based 

Bartholomew,  J.  B.,  Stults- Kolehmainen,  M.  A.,  Elrod,  C.  C.,  & 
Todd, J. S. (2008). Strength gains after resistance training: The 
effect of stressful, negative life events. Journal of Strength and 
Conditioning Research, 22(4), 1215–1221.

Bates,  D.,  Mächler,  M.,  Bolker,  B.,  & Walker,  S.  (2015).  Fitting  lin-
ear  mixed- effects  models  using  lme4.  Journal  of  Statistical 
Software, 67(1), 1–48. https:// doi. org/ 10. 18637/  jss. v067. i01
Bulbulian, R., Heaney, J., Leake, C., Sucec, A., & Sjoholm, N. (1996). 
The effect of sleep deprivation and exercise load on isokinetic 
leg  strength  and  endurance.  European  Journal  of  Applied 
Physiology, 73(3), 273–277.

Cook, C. J., & Crewther, B. T. (2012). Changes in salivary testosterone 
concentrations  and  subsequent  voluntary  squat  performance 
following the presentation of short video clips. Hormones and 
Behavior, 61(1), 17–22.

Craven, J., McCartney, D., Desbrow, B., Sabapathy, S., Bellinger, P., 
Roberts,  L.,  &  Irwin,  C.  (2022).  Effects  of  acute  sleep  loss  on 
physical  performance:  A  systematic  and  meta- analytical  re-
view. Sports Medicine, 52, 2669–2690.

De Vries, J., & Van Heck, G. L. (2002). Fatigue: Relationships with 
basic personality and temperament dimensions. Personality & 
Individual Differences, 33(8), 1311–1324.

Ehrhart, K. H., Roesch, S. C., Ehrhart, M. G., & Kilian, B. (2008). A 
test of the factor structure equivalence of the 50- item IPIP five- 
factor model measure across gender and ethnic groups. Journal 
of Personality Assessment, 90(5), 507–516.

Feigenbaum,  M.  S.,  &  Pollock,  M.  L.  (1999).  Prescription  of  resis-
tance training for health and disease. Medicine and Science in 
Sports and Exercise, 31(1), 38–45.

Field, A., Miles, J., & Field, Z. (2012). Discovering statistics using R. 

Sage publications.

García- Ramos, A., Barboza- González, P., Ulloa- Díaz, D., Rodriguez- 
Perea,  A.,  Martinez- Garcia,  D.,  Guede- Rojas,  F.,  Hinojosa- 
Riveros, H., Chirosa- Ríos, L. J., Cuevas- Aburto, J., & Janicijevic, 
D.  (2019).  Reliability  and  validity  of  different  methods  of  es-
timating  the  one- repetition  maximum  during  the  free- weight 
prone  bench  pull  exercise.  Journal  of  Sports  Sciences,  37, 
2205–2212.

García- Ramos, A., Torrejón, A., Feriche, B., Morales- Artacho, A. J., 
Pérez- Castilla, A., Padial, P., & Haff, G. G. (2018). Prediction of 
the maximum number of repetitions and repetitions in reserve 
from barbell velocity. International Journal of Sports Physiology 
and Performance, 13(3), 353–359.

García- Ramos,  A.,  Weakley,  J.,  Janicijevic,  D.,  &  Jukic,  I.  (2021). 
Number  of  repetitions  performed  before  and  after  reaching 
velocity  loss  thresholds:  First  repetition  versus  fastest  repeti-
tion—Mean velocity versus peak velocity. International Journal 
of Sports Physiology and Performance, 16, 950–957.

JUKIC et al. 
 
|  15 of 16

Goldberg, L. R. (1992). The development of markers for the big- five 

Lüdecke, D. (2018b). sjPlot: Data visualization for statistics in social 

factor structure. Psychological Assessment, 4(1), 26–42.

science. R Package Version. 2(1).

González- Badillo,  J.  J.,  Yañez- García,  J.  M.,  Mora- Custodio,  R., 
&  Rodríguez- Rosell,  D.  (2017).  Velocity  loss  as  a  variable  for 
monitoring resistance exercise. International Journal of Sports 
Medicine, 38(3), 217–225.

Gorostiaga,  E.  M.,  Navarro- Amézqueta,  I.,  Calbet,  J.  A.,  Sánchez- 
Medina,  L.,  Cusso,  R.,  Guerrero,  M.,  Granados,  C.,  González- 
Izal,  M.,  Ibáñez,  J.,  &  Izquierdo,  M.  (2014).  Blood  ammonia 
and lactate as markers of muscle metabolites during leg press 
exercise. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 28(10), 
2775–2785.

Gorostiaga,  E.  M.,  Navarro- Amézqueta,  I.,  González- Izal,  M., 
Malanda, A., Granados, C., Ibánez, J., Setuain, I., & Izquierdo, 
M.  (2012).  Blood  lactate  and  sEMG  at  different  knee  angles 
during fatiguing leg press exercise. European Journal of Applied 
Physiology, 112(4), 1349–1358.

Grgic, J., Lazinica, B., Schoenfeld, B. J., & Pedisic, Z. (2020). Test–re-
test reliability of the one- repetition maximum (1RM) strength 
assessment:  A  systematic  review.  Sports  Medicine  Open,  6(1), 
1–16.

Halperin, I., Malleron, T., Har- Nir, I., Androulakis- Korakakis, P., Wolf, 
M., Fisher, J., & Steele, J. (2021). Accuracy in predicting repeti-
tions to task failure in resistance exercise: A scoping review and 
exploratory meta- analysis. Sports Medicine, 52, 377–390.

Hartig,  F.  (2020).  DHARMa:  Residual  diagnostics  for  hierarchi-
cal  (multi- level/mixed)  regression  models  (2017).  R  Package 
Version 01 5.

Helms,  E.  R.,  Cronin,  J.,  Storey,  A.,  &  Zourdos,  M.  C.  (2016). 
Application  of  the  repetitions  in  reserve- based  rating  of 
perceived  exertion  scale  for  resistance  training.  Strength  & 
Conditioning Journal, 38(4), 42–49.

Helms,  E.  R.,  Zinn,  C.,  Rowlands,  D.  S.,  Naidoo,  R.,  &  Cronin, 
J.  (2015).  High- protein,  low- fat,  short- term  diet  results  in 
less  stress  and  fatigue  than  moderate- protein,  moderate- 
fat  diet  during  weight  loss  in  male  weightlifters:  A  pilot 
study.  International  Journal  of  Sport  Nutrition  and  Exercise 
Metabolism, 25(2), 163–170.

Jukic, I., Castilla, A., Ramos, A., Van Hooren, B., McGuigan, M., & 
Helms, E. (2022). The acute and chronic effects of implement-
ing  velocity  loss  thresholds  during  resistance  training:  A  sys-
tematic review, meta- analysis, and critical evaluation of the lit-
erature. Sports Medicine, 53, 177–214. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s4027 9-  022-  01754 -  4

Jukic, I., García- Ramos, A., Malecek, J., Omcirk, D., & Tufano, J. J. 
(2020a). Validity of load- velocity relationship to predict 1 repe-
tition maximum during deadlifts performed with and without 
lifting straps: The accuracy of six prediction models. Journal of 
Strength and Conditioning Research, 36(4), 902–910.

Jukic, I., García- Ramos, A., Malecek, J., Omcirk, D., & Tufano, J. J. 
(2020b). The use of lifting straps alters the entire load- velocity 
profile  during  the  deadlift  exercise.  Journal  of  Strength  & 
Conditioning Research, 34, 3331–3337.

Kraemer, W. J., Ratamess, N. A., & French, D. N. (2002). Resistance 
training  for  health  and  performance.  Current Sports Medicine 
Reports, 1(3), 165–171.

Miras- Moreno,  S.,  Pérez- Castilla,  A.,  &  García- Ramos,  A.  (2022). 
Lifting velocity as a predictor of the maximum number of repe-
titions that can be performed to failure during the prone bench 
pull  exercise.  International  Journal  of  Sports  Physiology  and 
Performance, 17(8), 1213–1221.

Morán- Navarro, R., Martínez- Cava, A., Sánchez- Medina, L., Mora- 
Rodríguez,  R.,  González- Badillo,  J.  J.,  &  Pallarés,  J.  G.  (2019). 
Movement velocity as a measure of level of effort during resis-
tance exercise. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 
33(6), 1496–1504.

Niewiadomski,  W.,  Laskowska,  D.,  Gąsiorowska,  A.,  Cybulski,  G., 
Strasz,  A.,  &  Langfort,  J.  (2008).  Determination  and  predic-
tion of one repetition maximum (1RM): Safety considerations. 
Journal of Human Kinetics, 19(1), 109–120.

O'Connor, P. J., Herring, M. P., & Caravalho, A. (2010). Mental health 
benefits  of  strength  training  in  adults.  American  Journal  of 
Lifestyle Medicine, 4(5), 377–396.

Orange, S. T., Metcalfe, J. W., Marshall, P., Vince, R. V., Madden, L. 
A., & Liefeith, A. (2020). Test- retest reliability of a commercial 
linear position transducer (GymAware PowerTool) to measure 
velocity and power in the back squat and bench press. Journal 
of Strength and Conditioning Research, 34(3), 728–737.

Ormsbee, M. J., Carzoli, J. P., Klemp, A., Allman, B. R., Zourdos, M. 
C., Kim, J.- S., & Panton, L. B. (2019). Efficacy of the repetitions 
in  reserve- based  rating  of  perceived  exertion  for  the  bench 
press in experienced and novice benchers. Journal of Strength 
and Conditioning Research, 33(2), 337–345.

Pérez- Castilla, A., Miras- Moreno, S., Janicijevic, D., & García- Ramos, 
A. (2023). Velocity loss is not an accurate predictor of the per-
centage of completed repetitions during the prone bench pull 
exercise. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 37(5), 
1001–1008.

Pestaña- Melero, F. L., Haff, G. G., Rojas, F. J., Pérez- Castilla, A., & 
García- Ramos, A. (2018). Reliability of the load–velocity rela-
tionship  obtained  through  linear  and  polynomial  regression 
models  to  predict  the  1- repetition  maximum  load.  Journal  of 
Applied Biomechanics, 34(3), 184–190.

Rathschlag,  M.,  &  Memmert,  D.  (2013).  The  influence  of  self- 
generated emotions on physical performance: An investigation 
of  happiness,  anger,  anxiety,  and  sadness.  Journal  of  Sport  & 
Exercise Psychology, 35(2), 197–210.

Richens, B., & Cleather, D. J. (2014). The relationship between the 
number of repetitions performed at given intensities is differ-
ent in endurance and strength trained athletes. Biology of Sport, 
31(2), 157–161.

Rodríguez- Rosell, D., Yáñez- García, J. M., Sánchez- Medina, L., Mora- 
Custodio, R., & González- Badillo, J. J. (2020). Relationship be-
tween velocity loss and repetitions in reserve in the bench press 
and back squat exercises. Journal of Strength and Conditioning 
Research, 34(9), 2537–2547.

Sánchez- Medina,  L.,  &  González- Badillo,  J.  J.  (2011).  Velocity  loss 
as  an  indicator  of  neuromuscular  fatigue  during  resistance 
training.  Medicine  and  Science  in  Sports  and  Exercise,  43(9), 
1725–1734.

Lüdecke, D. (2018a). Ggeffects: Tidy data frames of marginal effects 
from regression models. Journal of Open Source Software, 3(26), 
772.

Sánchez- Moreno, M., Rodríguez- Rosell, D., Pareja- Blanco, F., Mora- 
Custodio, R., & González- Badillo, J. J. (2017). Movement veloc-
ity as indicator of relative intensity and level of effort attained 

JUKIC et al. 
   
16 of 16 

| 

during  the  set  in  pull- up  exercise.  International  Journal  of 
Sports Physiology and Performance, 12(10), 1378–1384.

Suchomel, T. J., Nimphius, S., Bellon, C. R., & Stone, M. H. (2018). 
The importance of muscular strength: Training considerations. 
Sports Medicine, 46, 1419–1449.

Suchomel, T. J., Nimphius, S., & Stone, M. H. (2016). The importance 
of muscular strength in athletic performance. Sports Medicine, 
46(10), 1419–1449.

Weakley, J., Mann, B., Banyard, H., McLaren, S., Scott, T., & Garcia- 
Ramos, A. (2020). Velocity- based training: From theory to ap-
plication. Strength & Conditioning Journal, 43, 31–49.

Wickham,  H.,  Averick,  M.,  Bryan,  J.,  Chang,  W.,  McGowan,  L.  D. 
A., François, R., Grolemund, G., Hayes, A., Henry, L., & Hester, 
J.  (2019).  Welcome  to  the  Tidyverse.  Journal  of  Open  Source 
Software, 4(43), 1686.

Widiger, T. A. (2017). The Oxford handbook of the five factor model. 
Oxford  University  Press.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ oxfor dhb/ 
97801 99352 487. 001. 0001

Zourdos, M. C., Goldsmith, J. A., Helms, E. R., Trepeck, C., Halle, J. 
L., Mendez, K. M., Cooke, D. M., Haischer, M. H., Sousa, C. A., 
&  Klemp,  A.  (2021).  Proximity  to  failure  and  total  repetitions 
performed in a set influences accuracy of intraset repetitions in 
reserve- based rating of perceived exertion. Journal of Strength 
and Conditioning Research, 35, S158–S165.

Zourdos,  M.  C.,  Klemp,  A.,  Dolan,  C.,  Quiles,  J.  M.,  Schau,  K.  A., 
Jo, E., Helms, E., Esgro, B., Duncan, S., & Merino, S. G. (2016). 
Novel resistance training–specific rating of perceived exertion 
scale measuring repetitions in reserve. Journal of Strength and 
Conditioning Research, 30(1), 267–275.

SUPPORT IN G INFORMAT ION
Additional  supporting  information  can  be  found  online 
in  the  Supporting  Information  section  at  the  end  of  this 
article.

How to cite this article: Jukic, I., Prnjak, K., 
Helms, E. R., & McGuigan, M. R. (2024). Modeling 
the repetitions- in- reserve- velocity relationship: a 
valid method for resistance training monitoring 
and prescription, and fatigue management. 
Physiological Reports, 12, e15955. https://doi.
org/10.14814/phy2.15955

JUKIC et al.
