---
pmid: 39563758
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/39563758
title: The Evaluation of the Modified Wave Periodization Model Efficiency on the Example of Young Soccer Players' Sprint Tests.
---

Journal of Human Kinetics volume 94/2024, 215–226   DOI: 10.5114/jhk/191699  
                       Section III – Sports and Physical Activity 

215 

 The Evaluation of the Modified Wave Periodization Model 
Efficiency on the Example of Young Soccer Players' Sprint Tests 

by 
Marta Szymanek-Pilarczyk 1, Michał Jakub Nowak 2,*, Tomasz Góra 2,  
Łukasz Oleksy 3,4, Miłosz Drozd 5, Jacek Wąsik 2 

The  research  aimed  to  evaluate  the  modified  model  of  wave  periodization  efficiency  in  running  speed  tests 
conducted among soccer players aged 12 to 16. Participants included prospective players of a leading Polish top league 
soccer club. The research was carried out from 2018 to 2022 in June (Testing A) and December (Testing B) of each year. 
The test involved 30-m straight line running with 5-, 10-, and 30-m split time measurements. For this purpose, electronic 
photocells were used (FITLIGHT, Canada). The six-month training intervention increased the athletes' speed as there 
was a considerable decrease in the running time over the distance of 5 m (F = 7.86; p < 0.001), 10 m (F = 73.99; p < 0.001) 
and  30  m  (F  =  127.55;  p  <  0.001).  Analysis  of  running  performance  of  young  soccer  players  aged  12–16  showed  a 
significant improvement in speed at distances of 5, 10 and 30 m, confirming training effectiveness based on the wave 
periodization model. The negative correlation between testing year and performance suggests the influence of biological 
development  on  players'  speed.  The  COVID-19  pandemic  has  impacted  training,  which  was  reflected  in  reduced 
differences  between  test  scores.  Improving  initial  running  technique  can  contribute  to  better  match  results,  which 
emphasizes the need for an individual approach to the physical preparation of players.  

Keywords: soccer; youth athletes; speed; long term athlete development; tactical periodization 

Introduction 
In 

consistent 

the  pursuit 

of  planning 

the 
development  of  young  athletes  worldwide, 
irrespective  of 
their  sport,  coaches  devise 
programs  with  the  goal  of  enhancing  athletic 
concentrates  on 
efficiency.  This  objective 
maintaining 
sports 
performance  while  mitigating  the  risk  of  injuries 
(Kurt et al., 2023; Magoshi et al., 2023; Shan, 2023). 
In sports science, several established solutions exist 
for  addressing  these  challenges  (Blecharz  et  al., 
2022; Lindblom et al., 2023; Mynarski et al., 2015; 
Robertson and Joyce, 2015; Rodríguez-Rosell et al., 
2017).  These  solutions  provide  a  framework  for 
designing  customized  programs  tailored  to  the 

high-level 

for 

individual,  group,  and 

specific  requirements  of  an  athlete,  a  team  or  a 
club,  while  also  accounting 
individual 
development needs (Freitas et al., 2023; McFadden 
et al., 2023). Soccer academies worldwide serve as 
a valuable source of inspiration for creating rules 
that  enhance 
team 
competencies (Rongen et al., 2020; Towlson et al., 
2023). The solutions developed by coaches, teams, 
and  players  to  address  these  challenges  carry  a 
degree of risk due to the unique nature of the work 
environment.  Additionally,  competition  intensity 
and  the  demands  of  the  specific  sport  further 
increase the risk of failure (Cumming et al., 2018; 
Gdovin et al., 2023; Rongen et al., 2020).   

1 Faculty of Physical Culture Sciences, Jan Dlugosz University in Częstochowa, Czestochowa, Poland. 
2 Faculty of Physical Culture Sciences, Collegium Medicum im. dr. Władysława Biegańskiego, Jan Dlugosz University in 
Częstochowa, Częstochowa, Poland. 
3 Department of Physiotherapy, Faculty of Health Sciences, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland. 
4 Department of Orthopedics, Traumatology and Hand Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, 
Poland. 
5 Institute of Sport Sciences, Jerzy Kukuczka Academy of Physical Education in Katowice, Katowice, Poland. 
* Correspondence: edukacjawsporcie@icloud.com 

 
 
 
  
 
 
216  

The Evaluation of the modified wave periodization model efficiency on the soccer players' sprint tests 

Training  programs  based  on  "tactical 
periodization" (Mangan et al., 2022) are becoming 
increasingly  popular  among  leading  European 
teams.  They  aim  to  prepare  players  to  meet  
matches'  tactical  tasks  and  physical  demands,  
using  a  hybrid  approach  that  focuses  on  holistic  
training  without  isolated  elements,  by  the  "train 
while playing" principle. The key to this system is 
the  interaction  of  the  methodological  tenets  and 
understanding the foundations of the game model 
through  which  players  can  be  shaped  in  many 
areas  (technique,  fitness,  and  decision-making 
ability). 

One of the most critical abilities in soccer is 
speed,  which  significantly 
influences  match 
outcomes. Even a fraction of a second faster with 
the ball can determine whether a player scores the 
decisive  goal  or  prevents  it  (Clark,  2018).  Thus, 
speed  is  of  paramount  importance  in  modern 
soccer,  which  is  becoming  increasingly  faster 
(Jovanovic,  2011).  It  has  been  established  that 
players’ ability to achieve high linear velocity over 
their 
short  distances  differentiates  between 
performance (Baumgart et al., 2018). 

in 

of 

goal 

fostering 

The  motor  preparation  model  at  the  RKS 
Rakow  Czestochowa  Academy  is  based  on  a 
modified  tactical  periodization  model,  with  the 
additional 
long-term 
development  in  children  and  youth  (Szymanek-
Pilarczyk et al., 2023). A training mesocycle, lasting  
28  days,  comprises  four  microcycles:  volume  (7 
days), explosiveness (7 days), mixed (7 days), and 
regenerative (7 days). The volume microcycle takes 
large  spaces,  and  the  duration  of 
place 
individual games is long. Exercise intensity is low 
or  moderate.  The  explosiveness  microcycle  is 
characterized by games in small spaces, shortened 
exercise  duration,  and  an  increased  number  of 
repetitions.  Workouts  are  explosive,  including 
various power-building exercises. The intensity of 
training  measures  is  high  or  very  high.  In  the 
mixed  microcycle,  training  is  conducted  in  large, 
medium,  and  small  spaces,  with  the  exercises' 
duration adjusted to the space's size. The intensity 
of  the  games  ranges  from  moderate  to  high.  The 
is  characterized  by 
regeneration  microcycle 
training  volume  that  is  reduced  each  subsequent 
day.  The  main  goal  is  to  extend  rest  intervals  to 
ensure  recovery.  Games  occur  in  various  spaces, 
but  their  intensity  must  be  low.  The  described 
and  
microcycles 

terminology 

(system, 

and 

tactical 

aligned  with 

characteristics) result from the need to implement 
tactical  activities  that  are  part  of  the  training 
program  of 
the  RKS  Raków  Częstochowa 
Academy.  The  wave  system  of  microcycles  is 
implemented  throughout  the  season,  without  
preparatory,  starting  or  de-training  periods  
(Figure 1). The time structure of training remains 
consistent throughout the first and second rounds, 
with the exception of the regeneration microcycle, 
which  aims  to  restore  the  mental  and  muscular 
systems. The microcycle's nature and motor tasks 
technical 
are 
considerations, including actions in specific game 
phases  (attack,  defense,  transitions),  intensity 
zones  (low,  medium,  high),  and  sectors  (side, 
center).  Speed  training  is  integrated  into  various 
types  of  games  (small,  medium,  and  large)  and 
isolated  training  blocks  that  contribute  to  speed 
development.  The  main  conditioning  games  are 
scheduled  according  to  the  match  day  (MD)  +  3 
days (MD+3) and the match day − 3 days (MD–3). 
On MD+3 training days, small-sided games (SSGs) 
and  a  speed  development  block  (set  of  exercises) 
are  implemented.  The  MD–3  involves  games  on 
the pitch of medium and large dimensions from 5 
vs. 5 to 11 vs. 11 and a technique block (Chena et 
al., 2022). Speed activation is conducted on the day 
before  the  match  (MD−1).  Strength  training  also 
influences  speed  and  is  divided  into  upper  body 
(MD+2)  and  lower  body  (MD+3)  sessions.  The 
game  format  depends  on  the  number  of  players 
participating in the training session, and all games 
are  closely  connected  to  tactical  objectives  within 
specific microcycles. 

In  recent  years,  there  have  been  no  long-
term cross-sectional studies considering the latest 
trends in the development of youth soccer players. 
Therefore,  this  research  aimed  to  assess  the 
effectiveness  of  the  modified  wave  periodization 
model  in  running  speed  tests  conducted  among 
players  aged  12–16  at  the  RKS  Rakow  Soccer 
Academy  (potential  players  of  a  leading  Polish 
soccer  club) 
the  years  2018–2022.  We 
hypothesized that wave periodization would be an 
effective  way  to  improve  the  speed  variables  of 
youth soccer players. We also examined the effects 
of 
running 
performance  and  the  relationships  between  the 
selected  results  of  soccer  players  who  underwent 
testing. 

intervention  on 

training 

the 

in 

Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 94, October 2024 

http://www.johk.pl 

 
 
 
 
 
 by Marta Szymanek-Pilarczyk et al. 

217 

Methods 

Participants 

The  study  sample  comprised  soccer 
players  at  the  RKS  Rakow  Czestochowa  Soccer  
Academy  (Poland),  aged  12  to  16  and  with  4–8  
years  of  training  experience.  Since  all  players 
training at the Academy took part in testing (with 
the  exception  of  injured  players  who  could  not 
complete  the  tests),  each  year,  approximately  100 
players  were  evaluated  (from  96  to  106  in 
particular years). Players belonged to the following 
age  categories  (mean  ±  standard  deviation):  U16: 
19.5 ± 3.21; U15: 20.4 ± 1.52; U14: 20.2 ± 1.79; U13: 
19.4 ± 0.89; U12: 19.4 ± 2.61. They trained six times 
a  week,  with  four  team  training  sessions,  one 
formative training session and one match. Training 
included 90 min of gym training, 370 min of pitch 
training,  and  45–90  min  of  game.  The  planned 
duration of training within a week (in min) for each 
player  was  approximately  490,  regardless  of  the 
type of the macrocycle. All players adhered to the 
modified wave periodization model schedule. The 
same  training  plan  covered  each  age  group. 
Considering  the  participants’  performance  level, 
they competed at the level of the central league in 
their age group or the first league in their district. 

Measures 

Running speed was evaluated at a distance 
of  30  m.  Electronic  measuring  equipment,  i.e., 
FITLIGHT photocells (14845-6 Yonge Street, Suite 
376. Aurora, Ontario, L4G 6H8 Canada), was used 
for  time  analysis.  Measurements  were  made  at 
distances of 5, 10 and 30 m from the starting point. 
The player’s foot was placed 20 cm in front of the 
first photocell line. Players began from a crouched 
start  and  they  decided  about  the  start  time 
themselves. Each player performed two trials with 
3-min  rest  intervals  in  between,  and  the  results 
were  recorded  with  accuracy  of  0.001  s.  All 
measurements 
the  same 
conditions,  always  in  the  same  sports  hall  with  a 
synthetic surface and temperature of 20°C. Players 
ran in sports shoes with indoor soles. 

took  place  under 

Design and Procedures 

Protocol 

Before  the  tests,  players  performed  a  12-
min  warm-up  according  to  the  RAMP  protocol  

in 

the 

(Raise,  Activate,  Mobilize,  Potentiate).  The  motor 
ability tests took place annually, with evaluations 
in  June  (Testing  A)  and  December  (Testing  B) 
carried out after the competitive round in a specific 
microcycle with a standardized test protocol. The  
tests  consistently  occurred 
  volume 
microcycle  on  MD+3  (the  third  day  after  the  
match).  The  day  before  evaluations,  a  recovery 
training  session  was  conducted.  All  tests  were 
performed  in  the  same  location,  with  uniform 
surface 
conditions 
(standardized).  The  tests  took  place  at  the  same 
time, from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. Before the tests all 
participants  consumed  a  meal  prepared  by  the 
clubs nutrition specialist (dietitian). All motor tests 
were carried out by experienced coaches (Masters 
of  Science  in  Physical  Education,  ASCA  Level  I 
Trainers). 

temperature 

and 

Training Program 

Players adhered to the following schedule: 
MD+1  Day  Off;  MD+2  Recovery  Training;  MD+3 
Small-Sided  Games;  MD−3  Medium-Sided/Large 
Games;  MD–2  Day  Off,  MD–1  Pre-match 
Preparation. Training blocks that influenced speed 
were  integrated  at  the  beginning  of  each  training 
session. The content of the speed block was closely 
aligned  with  the  tactical  requirements  of  the 
microcycle,  encompassing  different  patterns, 
movements, and running distances associated with 
tactical actions in various phases of the game. The 
block  shaping  linear  speed  was  administered  on 
MD+3,  and  consisted  of  activation  exercises  and 
competitive sprints, with total duration of 15 min. 
The running technique block was implemented on 
MD–3 to teach or enhance the technique of specific 
running elements, with duration ranging from 12 
to 15 min. Speed emphasis was applied on MD–1, 
including reaction time and acceleration elements. 
The  strength 
training  program  was  closely 
coordinated  with  speed  sessions  to  ensure  that 
strength  exercises  aligned  with  key  movement 
patterns used during running. 

Ethics 

All participants were thoroughly informed 
about the study's content, objectives, possible risks, 
and  benefits.  The  tasks  and  exercises  performed 
were typical of their training, such as sprints and 
jumps.  All  participants  held  federation  licenses, 
and  parents  had  authorized  their  participation  in  

Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 

 
 
 
 
218  

The Evaluation of the modified wave periodization model efficiency on the soccer players' sprint tests 

the  club's  soccer  activities  at  the  start  of  each 
season.  Interval  training  did  not  deviate  from 
regular soccer training and did not introduce any 
additional  risk.  Additionally,  all  participants 
the  
underwent  medical  examinations  before 
season,  and  the  tests  were  conducted  without 
injury  or  physical  discomfort.  This  study  aligned 
with  the  principles  outlined  in  the  Declaration  of  
the 
Helsinki.  Approval  was  obtained 
the  District  Medical 
bioethics  committee  at 
Chamber 
number: 
in  Krakow 
16/KBL/OIL/2016;  approval  date:  10  February 
2016). 

(approval 

from 

Statistical Analysis 

Sample  size  estimated  using  G*Power 
software  (version  3.1.9.2;  Kiel  University,  Kiel, 
Germany) (Faul et al., 2007) returned a minimum 
of 18 participants, for α = 0.05, effect size f = 0.75 
and  β  =  0.95.  The  mean  value  and  standard 
deviation  were  calculated  for  all  indicators.  The 
normality  of  the  distribution  was  assessed  using 
the  Shapiro-Wilk  test.  Due  to  the  non-normal 
distribution,  differences  between  the  compared 
groups  were evaluated  using  Friedman ANOVA. 
Spearman's  rank  correlation  coefficients  were 
indicators.  Statistical 
calculated 
significance  was  assumed  at  p  <  0.01.  All 
calculations  were  performed  using  Statistica  13. 
The  following  scale  was  adopted  to  assess  the 
strength of correlation: very weak: r < 0.10; weak: r 
0.10 < 0.39; moderate: r 0.40 < 0.69; strong: r 0.70 < 
0.89; very strong: r < 0.90 (Schober et al., 2018). 

for  selected 

0.06 s). The smallest difference occurred during the 
COVID-19  pandemic  in  2020.  There  was  a  clear 
positive  trend  of  improved  results  for  each 
analyzed year.  

Figure 3 illustrates the average 10-m sprint  
test results over five years. Significant differences 
were  observed  between  tests  conducted  in  June 
and  December  (F  =  73.99;  p  <  0.001)  with  most  
significant difference recorded in 2022 (of around 
0.06  s).  It  should  be  noted  that  the  size  of  this 
difference  was  related  to  the  slower  results 
compared to the previous year in tests conducted 
in  June.  The  smallest  difference  between  the 
average  results  and  the  10-m  sprint  time  was 
recorded in 2019.  

differences 

Figure 4 shows the average results for 30-
m sprint performance. Statistical analysis showed 
significant 
particular 
assessments  (F  =  127.55;  p  <  0.001).  The  largest 
differences  between  tests  conducted  in  June  and 
December  were  observed  in  2022,  while  the 
smallest  in  2020.  Figures  3  and  4  present  a  very 
similar trend. 

between 

Table  2  shows  the  correlation  coefficients 
between  the  results  of  individual  tests  and  the 
particular year of conducted evaluations. The year 
of testing showed a weak negative correlation with 
the results obtained at respective distances in both 
testing  moments  (June  and  December),  which 
means  that  athletes  of  the  same  age  ran  slightly 
faster  from  year  to  year.  Statistical  analysis 
confirmed  a high  positive  correlation  between  all 
conducted tests. 

Results 

Discussion 

Table  1  presents  the  average  results  of 
assessments conducted in 2018–2022 for 12–16 age 
groups.  As  expected,  the  oldest  players  achieved 
the best test results (80% of cases; 24/30). The most 
deviations  from  this  rule  were  observed  in  2019 
when  15-year-old  players  outperformed  their 
oldest peers in three tests, and the most significant 
difference compared to the oldest group occurred 
in  2021  (December)  when  14-year-old  players 
obtained highest scores in the running test over a 
distance of 5 m. 

In  subsequent  years  improvements  were 
observed 
in  5-m  sprint  performance,  with 
significant differences between particular tests (F = 
7.86;  p  <  0.001).  The  most  significant  differences 
were observed in 2021 and 2022 (of approximately  

Our results confirm that training based on 
the  wave  periodization  model  significantly 
impacts  running  speed  of  youth  (12–16-year-old) 
soccer players. Significant differences in the results 
of the 5-, 10- and 30-m sprint tests were recorded 
between  2018  and  2022.  Considering  every  year 
included  in  the  analysis,  there  was  a  notable 
difference between the tests conducted in June and 
December,  indicating  that  interval  training  could 
lead 
improved  sprint  performance.  This 
improvement  holds  great  significance  in  a  match 
context,  as  high  sprint  speeds  are  crucial  for 
professional 
performance, 
especially  under  fatigue  (Nicholson  et  al.,  2021; 
Oliva-Lozano  et  al.,  2023a,  2023b).  In fact,  sprints 
account for 83% of the time before scoring a goal  

players' 

soccer 

to 

Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 94, October 2024 

http://www.johk.pl 

 
 
 
 
 by Marta Szymanek-Pilarczyk et al. 

219 

(Faude et al., 2012). It is essential to emphasize non-
linear  sprints  without  ball  possession  in  training, 
tailored to the specific tactical requirements of each  

player's  position  (Asian-Clemente  et  al.,  2024; 
Beato and Drust, 2021). 

Table 1. Summary of players’ results in running tests at distances of 5, 10 and 30 m, considering age groups, 
the year of testing and the month when testing was conducted (Testing A: June; Testing B: December). 

Year 
of 
testing 

Number 
of 
players 
(n) 

Age 

Testing A

Testing B 

5 m 

30 m
± SD  AVG ± SD AVG ± SD AVG ± SD AVG 

10 m

5 m

10 m 

AVG 

30 m

± SD  AVG 

± SD 

2022 

2021 

2020 

2019 

2018 

24 

21 

18 

20 

16 

17 

21 

20 

18 

20 

22 

22 

20 

19 

23 

18 

20 

20 

20 

20 

17 

18 

23 

20 

18 

16 

15 

14 

13 

12 

16 

15 

14 

13 

12 

16 

15 

14 

13 

12 

16 

15 

14 

13 

12 

16 

15 

14 

13 

12 

1.065 

0.078 

1.809 

0.072 

4.273 

0.104 

0.993 

0.045 

1.729 

0.057 

4.129 

0.111 

1.068 

0.055 

1.822 

0.045 

4.276 

0.082 

1.043 

0.058 

1.79 

0.074 

4.206 

0.084 

1.097 

0.073 

1.866 

0.074 

4.451 

0.163 

1.054 

0.061 

1.823 

0.069 

4.289 

0.110 

1.164 

0.073 

1.944 

0.095 

4.686 

0.228 

1.101 

0.065 

1.858 

0.083 

4.561 

0.192 

1.162 

0.064 

1.980 

0.051 

4.875 

0.125 

1.109 

0.053 

1.923 

0.073 

4.729 

0.178 

1.082 

0.079 

1.777 

0.050 

4.172 

0.123 

1.034 

0.047 

1.743 

0.057 

4.146 

0.155 

1.072 

0.062 

1.79 

0.061 

4.211 

0.134 

1.024 

0.043 

1.754 

0.056 

4.209 

0.133 

1.081 

0.061 

1.837 

0.067 

4.380 

0.130 

1.017 

0.064 

1.778 

0.063 

4.301 

0.105 

1.161 

0.073 

1.925 

0.077 

4.642 

0.194 

1.133 

0.081 

1.916 

0.099 

4.603 

0.202 

1.197 

0.067 

1.993 

0.093 

4.850 

0.248 

1.134 

0.063 

1.954 

0.084 

4.781 

0.231 

1.091 

0.052 

1.841 

0.056 

4.328 

0.145 

1.077 

0.062 

1.812 

0.073 

4.284 

0.139 

1.097 

0.047 

1.854 

0.058 

4.379 

0.163 

1.102 

0.067 

1.825 

0.076 

4.311 

0.165 

1.155 

0.067 

1.933 

0.091 

4.567 

0.241 

1.112 

0.056 

1.877 

0.078 

4.514 

0.172 

1.192 

0.075 

2.023 

0.099 

4.814 

0.207 

1.181 

0.077 

1.998 

0.100 

4.797 

0.186 

1.145 

0.056 

1.971 

0.075 

4.868 

0.156 

1.171 

0.066 

1.981 

0.075 

4.864 

0.188 

1.130 

0.064 

1.861 

0.055 

4.361 

0.106 

1.100 

0.060 

1.857 

0.073 

4.342 

0.162 

1.113 

0.059 

1.857 

0.057 

4.418 

0.193 

1.112 

0.088 

1.849 

0.081 

4.362 

0.159 

1.162 

0.074 

1.926 

0.094 

4.545 

0.188 

1.137 

0.084 

1.896 

0.122 

4.494 

0.236 

1.201 

0.066 

1.973 

0.097 

4.686 

0.252 

1.195 

0.074 

2.027 

0.229 

4.658 

0.281 

1.230 

0.072 

2.065 

0.113 

5.047 

0.148 

1.198 

0.059 

2.029 

0.078 

4.955 

0.112 

1.106 

0.052 

1.882 

0.055 

4.356 

0.122 

1.091 

0.067 

1.835 

0.060 

4.282 

0.118 

1.117 

0.065 

1.860 

0.082 

4.408 

0.161 

1.107 

0.061 

1.849 

0.063 

4.326 

0.086 

1.159 

0.077 

1.924 

0.083 

4.540 

0.178 

1.113 

0.066 

1.876 

0.064 

4.412 

0.159 

1.174 

0.059 

1.931 

0.075 

4.641 

0.171 

1.179 

0.077 

1.978 

0.092 

4.634 

0.175 

1.222 

0.07 

2.046 

0.085 

4.815 

0.227 

1.212 

0.078 

2.042 

0.085 

4.841 

0.293 

AVG: average, ± SD: standard deviation, (n): number of players, values highlighted in yellow: best results in the 5-m 
sprint; green: best results in the 10-m sprint; red: best results in the 30-m sprint. Bold text: age category of players 
generating the best result 

Table 2. The Spearman's correlation table of the selected indicators. 

Variable 

Testing A (June) 

Testing B (December) 

5 m 

10 m 

30 m 

5 m 

10 m 

30 m 

Year of testing 

−0.24* 

Testing A 
(June) 

Testing B 
(December) 

5 m 

10 m 

30 m 

5 m 

10 m 

−0.23* 

0.79* 

−0.16* 

0.67* 

0.84* 

* p < 0.05 

−0.41* 

−0.35* 

−0.23* 

0.61* 

0.65* 

0.62* 

0.62* 

0.76* 

0.75* 

0.89* 

0.60* 

0.77* 

0.89* 

0.74* 

0.87* 

Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
220  

The Evaluation of the modified wave periodization model efficiency on the soccer players' sprint tests 

Figure 1. The figure shows the theoretical assumptions for the construction of individual microcycles in 
"Wave Periodization". The dashed trend line represents waves. The total training time per week is scheduled 
for 490 min. The height of the bar in the following weeks refers to the planned load of the athlete according 
to the following formula (planned intensity assessed by a subjective fatigue scale RPE on a scale from 1 to 10 
x training volume (measured by the planned training time)).  
1. Planned RPE volume microcycle at level 7 x training time; 2. Planned RPE explosive microcycle at level 8 x 
training time; 3. Planned mixed RPE microcycle at level 9 x planned training time; 4. Planned RPE 
regeneration microcycle at level 6 x training time. 

Figure 2. Changes in the average results achieved by players in the 5-m running test versus the year of the 
conducted assessment (from 2018 to 2022). The red line shows the results of testing A (in June), while the 
blue line shows the results of testing B (in December). 

Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 94, October 2024 

http://www.johk.pl 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 by Marta Szymanek-Pilarczyk et al. 

221 

Figure 3. Changes in the average results achieved by players in the 10-m running test versus the year of the 
conducted assessment (from 2018 to 2022). The red line shows the results of testing A (in June), while the 
blue line shows the results of testing B (in December). 

Figure 4. Changes in the average results achieved by players in the 30-m running test versus the year of the 
conducted assessment (from 2018 to 2022). The red line shows the results of testing A (in June), while the 
blue line shows the results of testing B (in December). 

Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
222  

The Evaluation of the modified wave periodization model efficiency on the soccer players' sprint tests 

The  research  shows  an  overall  trend  of 
improving  running  speed  over  five  consecutive 
years,  with 
the  exception  of  2019  when 
performance  declined  across  all  running  trials. 
This  decline  was  attributed  to  disruptions  in  the 
training  process  caused  by  the  reconstruction  of 
club training facilities, including the unavailability 
of  a  full-size  sports  field,  changes  in  training 
schedules, and inconsistent access to gym facilities. 
Scientific  sources  support  the  influence  of  such 
factors  on  players’  development  (Araújo  et  al., 
2014). In 2020, the year of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
small differences were observed between testing in 
June and December, which can be attributed to the 
restrictions  on  regular  training  and  the  resulting 
to  significantly  smaller 
irregularity, 
progress. 

leading 

Our  results  indicate  a  weak  negative 
correlation  between 
the  particular  year  of 
conducted evaluations and the results of testing in 
June  and  December, 
indicating  that  players' 
biological development contributed to their speed. 
This  conclusion  aligns  with  existing  research 
(Gundersen  et  al.,  2022;  Negra  et  al.,  2022).  The 
correlation  coefficients  clearly  indicate  that  all 
speed  test  results  are  interrelated.  For  example, 
improvement  in  the  5-m  sprint  test  conducted  in 
June  coincided  with  improved  10-  and  30-m 
performance in December, reflecting the successful 
training  process  and  evident  enhancement  of 
players  running  speeds  across  distances  ranging 
from 5 to 30 m. 

and 

In  conclusion,  the  wave  periodization 
model proves to be an effective approach for long-
term  planning  and  speed  development.  The 
training regimen based on this model encompasses 
not  only  physical  aspects,  but  also  mental, 
sociological  dimensions 
physiological, 
(Mangan  et  al.,  2022).  This  research  provides  an 
insightful  analysis  of  the  impact  of  a  modified 
training  strategy  on  developing  players’  speed 
within  a  long-term  program.  It  aligns  with  the 
observations  of  coaches  and  researchers  and 
underscores  the  need  for  continuous  players’ 
progress  monitoring  (Houtmeyers  et  al.,  2021; 
Matusiński  et  al.,  2021;  Theodoropoulos  et  al., 
2020).  The  authors  aimed  to  address  the  gap 
regarding  the  long-term  observation  of  youth 
soccer  players  by  conducting  an  analysis  of  the 
impact of tactical periodization training conducted 
at a prominent sports club in Poland. 

Practical Implications 

The  research  results  provide  valuable 
information  for  soccer  coaches  and  strength  and 
conditioning  specialists  that  can  be  used  to 
optimize soccer training. The data allow to identify 
key areas where training brings the most benefits, 
such as initial speed, acceleration, and speed-based 
endurance.  Thanks  to  this,  coaches  can  adapt 
training  programs  to  players'  individual  needs, 
leading 
to  more  personalized  and  effective 
development  of  players  and,  as  a  result,  better 
performance during matches. The idea of using the 
tactical  periodization  model  (wave  periodization) 
can  undoubtedly  be  transferred  to  other  team 
games  in  terms  of  motor  preparation  of  players 
and  development  of  motor  abilities  in  relation  to 
the requirements of a given position and the type 
of game. 

Research Limitations 

The limitations of this work result from its 
general  nature  and  long-term  time  horizon.  The 
analysis does not include individual variables such 
as recovery and sleep quality, which are important 
for muscular and physiological adaptation (on the 
day  of  testing).  Moreover,  the  study  did  not  take 
into account the impact of the migration of players 
from other clubs who joined the Academy in older 
years.  The  integration  of  these  players  might 
introduce  additional  variability  in  performance, 
given  their  prior  experiences  and  training,  which 
might  differ  from  the  methods  used  in  the 
Academy. 

Future Research Directions 

Future research may focus on creating new 
percentile  charts  considering  a  range  of  speed, 
endurance  and  power.  Such  tools  will  enable  a 
better understanding of norms and references for 
players at different levels of advancement, which 
may  contribute  to  an  even  more  individualized 
approach  to  training  and  sports  development. 
These  grids  will  also  serve  as  a  benchmark  for 
assessing the progress and effectiveness of training 
programs. 

Conclusions 

Training based on the wave periodization 
model  significantly  impacted  the  sprinting  speed 
of  youth  soccer  players  aged  12  to  16.  Statistical  

Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 94, October 2024 

http://www.johk.pl 

 
 
 
 by Marta Szymanek-Pilarczyk et al. 

223 

analysis  showed  significant  differences  in  the 
results of sprint tests over distances of 5, 10 and 30 
m conducted between 2018 and 2022. Furthermore, 
each  year  there  was  a  noticeable  difference 
between  tests  conducted  in  June  and  December. 
This  indicates  that  training  based  on  the  wave 
model  was  effective  and  resulted  in  improved 
sprint performance. Additionally, a weak negative 
correlation  was  found  between  the  particular 
testing  year  and  results  obtained  in  assessments 
completed in June and December, suggesting that 
players'  biological  development  contributes  to 
their speed. In the year of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
small  differences  between  evaluations  conducted 
in  June  and  December  can  be  attributed  to 
limitations  in  regular  training  and  the  resulting 
irregularity, 
lower 
to 
performance.  The  correlation  coefficients  indicate 
that the running speed test results are related. 

significantly 

leading 

in 

resulted 

the  most 

in  December,  reflecting  an 
results  obtained 
effective 
training  process  and  a  marked 
improvement  in  the  players'  sprint  speed  over 
distances from 5 to 30 m. The observed changes in 
sprint  test  scores  highlight  specific  areas  where 
training 
significant 
improvements. A data-driven approach facilitates 
more  personalized 
effective  players’ 
and 
development,  ultimately  contributing  to  better 
match outcomes. Improved performance in short-
distance sprints is associated with enhanced initial 
speed, allowing coaches to recognize that focusing 
on starting techniques can benefit the entire team. 
Analysis  of  the  wave  periodization  pattern  and 
identified  correlations  provide  coaches  with 
practical  tools  enabling  a  more  precise  and 
effective  approach  to  the  long-term  physical 
preparation  of  players,  which  may  translate  into 
excellent results in team sports. 

Improvements in the 5-m test conducted in 
June  correlated  with  improved  5-,  10-  and  30-m  

Author  Contributions:  Conceptualization:  M.S.-P.  and  M.J.N.;  methodology:  M.S.-P.  and  M.J.N.;  software: 

T.G.,  Ł.O.,  M.D.  and  J.W.;  validation:  M.S.-P.  and  M.J.N.;  formal  analysis:  M.S.-P.,  M.J.N.  and  J.W.; 

investigation: M.S.-P. and M.J.N.; resources: T.G., M.D. and Ł.O.; data curation: M.J.N. and J.W.; writing—

original  draft  preparation:  M.S.-P.,  M.J.N.  and  J.W.;    writing—review  &  editing:  M.S.-P.,  M.J.N.  and  J.W.; 

visualization: J.W. and M.J.N.; supervision: J.W.; project administration: M.J.N. and J.W. All authors have read 

and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.  

ORCID iD:  

Marta Szymanek-Pilarczyk: 0000-0002-6179-0849 

Michał Jakub Nowak: 0000-0001-5859-0486 

Tomasz Góra: 0000-0002-0660-4038 

Łukasz Oleksy: 0000-0002-0589-0554 

Miłosz Drozd: 0000-0002-4477-2390 

Jacek Wąsik: 0000-0002-6285-7283 

Funding Information: This research received no external funding. 

Institutional Review Board Statement: This study was conducted following the principles of the Declaration 

of  Helsinki  and  approved  by  the  Ethics  Committee  of  the  District  Medical  Chamber  in  Krakow  (approval 

number: 16/KBL/OIL/2016; approval date: 10 February 2016). 

Informed Consent: Informed consent was obtained from all participants included in the study. 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
224  

The Evaluation of the modified wave periodization model efficiency on the soccer players' sprint tests 

Acknowledgements: We would like to thank the Club's management board and the Academy Director Dariusz 

Grzegrzółka and Director Marek Śledź for their constant support and invaluable advice. Your guidance has 

been instrumental in our efforts, and your commitment is deeply appreciated. Thank you for being with us 

and looking for new solutions. 

Received: 18 September 2023 

Accepted: 26 July 2024 

References 

Araújo, F. P., Miller, K. C., Manner, C. K. (2014). The Effect of Brazilian Soccer Club Infrastructure and Player 
Experience on Individual Player Success. Journal of Physical Education and Sports Management, 1(1), 93–
99. 

Asian-Clemente, J. A., Rabano-Muñoz, A., Suarez-Arrones, L., & Requena, B. (2024). Analysis of Differences 
in  Running  Demands  between  Official  Matches  and  Transition  Games  of  Young  Professional  Soccer 
Players 
121–13. 
https://doi.org/10.5114/jhk/175339 

the  Playing  Position. Journal 

of  Human  Kinetics, 92(4), 

according 

to 

Baumgart, C., Freiwald, J., Hoppe, M. (2018). Sprint Mechanical Properties of Female and Different Aged Male 

Top-Level German Soccer Players. Sports, 6(4), 161. https://doi.org/10.3390/sports6040161 

Beato,  M.,  Drust,  B.  (2021).  Acceleration  intensity  is  an  important  contributor  to  the  external  and  internal 
training load demands of repeated sprint exercises in soccer players. Research in Sports Medicine, 29(1), 
67–76. https://doi.org/10.1080/15438627.2020.1743993 

Blecharz, J., Wrześniewski, K., Siekańska, M., Ambroży, T., & Spieszny, M. (2022). Cognitive Factors in Elite 
Handball: Do players’ positions determine their cognitive processes? Journal of Human Kinetics, 82(1), 
213–221. https://doi.org/10.2478/hukin 2022 0063 

Chena,  M.,  Morcillo-Losa,  J.  A.,  Rodríguez-Hernández,  M.  L.,  Asín-Izquierdo,  I.,  Pastora-Linares,  B.,  & 
Zapardiel,  J.  C.  (2022).  Workloads  of  different  soccer-specific  drills  in  professional  players. Journal  of 
Human Kinetics, 84(1), 135–147. https://doi.org/10.2478/hukin-2022-000075 

Clark, K. (2018). The need for speed-improving sprinting performance in football players. National Strength 

and Conditioning Association Coach, 5(4), 14–22. 

Coutinho, D., Gonçalves, B., Figueira, B., Abade, E., Marcelino, R., Sampaio, J. (2015). Typical weekly workload 
of under 15, under 17, and under 19 elite Portuguese football players. Journal of Sports Sciences, 33(12), 
1229–1237. https://doi.org/10.1080/02640414.2015.1022575 

Cumming, S. P., Brown, D. J., Mitchell, S., Bunce, J., Hunt, D., Hedges, C., Malina, R. M. (2018). Premier League 
academy  soccer  players’  experiences  of  competing  in  a  tournament  bio-banded  for  biological 
maturation. Journal of Sports Sciences, 36(7), 757–765. https://doi.org/10.1080/02640414.2017.1340656 
Faude,  O.,  Koch,  T.,  Meyer,  T.  (2012).  Straight  sprinting  is  the  most  frequent  action  in  goal  situations  in 
625–631. 
of 

Sciences, 

Sports 

30(7), 

professional 
football. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02640414.2012.665940 

Journal 

Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A. G., Buchner, A. (2007). G* Power 3: A flexible statistical power analysis program 
for  the  social,  behavioral,  and  biomedical  sciences. Behavior  Research  Methods, 39(2),  175–191. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/bf03193146 

Freitas, T. T., Pereira, L. A., Alcaraz, P. E., Azevedo, P. H. S. M., Zanetti, V., Pantarotto, N. B., Loturco, I. (2023). 
Mixed  Training  Programs  Applied  to  Young  Soccer  Players:  Effects  on  Speed-Power  Abilities. 
International Journal of Sports Medicine, 44(14), 1049–1058 https://doi.org/10.1055/a-2106-8164 

Gdovin, J. R., Galloway, R., Tomasiello, L. S., Seabolt, M., Booker, R. (2023). External Training Load Monitoring 
and the Impact on Training Load Management in Collegiate Male Soccer Players. Journal of Strength and 
Conditioning Research, 37(7), 1434–1439. https://doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0000000000004080 

Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 94, October 2024 

http://www.johk.pl 

 
 
 
 
 by Marta Szymanek-Pilarczyk et al. 

225 

Gundersen, H., Riiser, A., Algroy, E., Vestbøstad, M., Saeterbakken, A. H., Clemm, H. H.,  Rygh, C. B. (2022). 
Associations  between  biological  maturity  level,  match  locomotion,  and  physical  capacities  in  youth 
male  soccer  players.  Scandinavian  Journal  of  Medicine  &  Science  in  Sports,  32(11),  1592–1601. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/sms.14225 

Houtmeyers, K. C., Vanrenterghem, J., Jaspers, A., Ruf, L., Brink, M. S., Helsen, W. F. (2021). Load Monitoring 
Practice in European Elite Football and the Impact of Club Culture and Financial Resources. Frontiers in 
Sports and Active Living, 3, 679824. https://doi.org/10.3389/fspor.2021.679824 

Jovanovic,  M.,  Sporis,  G.,  Omrcen,  D.,  &  Fiorentini,  F.  (2011).  Effects  of  speed,  agility,  quickness  training 
method on power performance in elite soccer players. Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research, 25(5), 
1285–1292. 

Kurt, C., Canli, U., Erdaş, S. E., Poli, L., Carvutto, R., Cataldi, S., Greco, G. (2023). Effectiveness of Vertical 
versus  Horizontal  Plyometric  Training  on  Stretch-Shortening  Cycle  Performance  Enhancement  in 
Adolescent Soccer Players. Healthcare, 11(11), 1615. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare11111615. 
Lindblom,  H.,  Waldén,  M.,  Hägglund,  M.  (2023).  Adherence  to  Injury  Prevention  Exercise  Programmes  in 
Amateur Adolescent and Adult Football: A Detailed Description of Programme Use from a Randomised 
Study. Sports Medicine - Open, 9(1), 57. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40798-023-00608-1 

Magoshi,  H.,  Hoshiba,  T.,  Tohyama,  M.,  Hirose,  N.,  Fukubayashi,  T.  (2023).  Effect  of  the  FIFA  11+  injury 
prevention program in collegiate female football players over three consecutive seasons. Scandinavian 
Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports, 33(8), 1494–1508. https://doi.org/10.1111/sms.14379 

Mangan,  S.,  Collins,  K.,  Burns,  C.,  &  O’Neill,  C.  (2022).  A  tactical  periodisation  model  for  Gaelic 

football. International Journal of Sports Science & Coaching, 17(1), 208–219. 

Matusiński, A., Gołaś, A., Zając, A., Nitychoruk, M., Maszczyk, A. (2021). Optimizing the load for peak power 
and  peak  velocity  development  during  resisted  sprinting.  Physical  Activity  Review,  9(1),  128–134. 
https://doi.org/10.16926/par.2021.09.15 

McFadden, B. A., Bozzini, B. N., Cintineo, H. P., Hills, S. P., Walker, A. J., Chandler, A. J., Arent, S. M. (2023). 
Power,  Endurance,  and  Body  Composition  Changes  Over  a  Collegiate  Career  in  National  Collegiate 
Athletic  Association  Division  I  Women  Soccer  Athletes.  Journal  of  Strength  and  Conditioning  Research, 
37(7), 1428–1433. https://doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0000000000004413 

Mynarski,  W.Cholewa,  J.  Rozpara,  M.  Strojek,  K.  Nawrocka,  A.  R  (2015).  Recommendations  for  health-
enhancing physical activities in type 2 diabetes patients. Journal of Physical Therapy Science, 27(8),  2419–
2422. Doi:10.1589/jpts.27.2419 

Negra, Y., Sammoud, S., Nevill, A. M., Chaabene, H. (2022). Change of Direction Speed in Youth Male Soccer 
Players:  The  Predictive  Value  of  Anthropometrics  and  Biological  Maturity.  Pediatric  Exercise  Science, 
35(1), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1123/pes.2021-0178 

Nicholson,  B.,  Dinsdale,  A.,  Jones,  B.,  Till,  K. (2021). The  Training  of  Short  Distance  Sprint  Performance  in 
Football  Code  Athletes:  A  Systematic  Review  and  Meta-Analysis.  Sports  Medicine,  51(6),  1179–1207. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-020-01372-y 

Oliva-Lozano, J. M., Cuenca-López, J., Suárez, J., Granero-Gil, P., & Muyor, J. M. (2023a). When and How Do 
Soccer Players  From a Semi-Professional  Club Sprint  in  Match  Play? Journal  of  Human  Kinetics, 86(1), 
195–204. https://doi.org/10.5114/jhk/159964 

Oliva-Lozano, J. M., Fortes, V., López-Del Campo, R., Resta, R., & Muyor, J. M. (2023b). When and how do 
professional  soccer  players  experience  maximal  intensity  sprints  in  LaLiga?  Science  and  Medicine  in 
Football, 7(3), 288–296. https://doi.org/10.1080/24733938.2022.2100462 

Robertson, S. J., Joyce, D. G. (2015). Informing in-season tactical periodisation in team sport: development of a 
of  Sports  Sciences,  33(1),  99–107. 

for  Super  Rugby. 

Journal 

index 

match  difficulty 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02640414.2014.925572 

Rodríguez-Rosell,  D.,  Mora-Custodio,  R.,  Franco-Márquez,  F.,  Yáñez-García,  J.  M.,  González-Badillo,  J.  J. 
(2017). Traditional vs. Sport-Specific Vertical Jump Tests: Reliability, Validity, and Relationship With 
the Legs Strength and Sprint Performance in Adult and Teen Soccer and Basketball Players. Journal of 
Strength and Conditioning Research, 31(1), 196–206. https://doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0000000000001476 

Articles published in the Journal of Human Kinetics are licensed under an open access Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 
license. 

 
 
 
226  

The Evaluation of the modified wave periodization model efficiency on the soccer players' sprint tests 

Rongen, F., McKenna, J., Cobley, S., Tee, J. C., Till, K. (2020). Psychosocial outcomes associated with soccer 
academy involvement: Longitudinal comparisons against aged matched school pupils. Journal of Sports 
Sciences, 38(11–12), 1387–1398. https://doi.org/10.1080/02640414.2020.1778354 

Shan, G. (2023). The Practicality and Effectiveness of Soccer Scoring Techniques Revealed by Top Elite Soccer 

Scorers. Physical Activity Review, 11(1), 99–111. https://doi.org/10.16926/par.2023.11.12 

Szymanek-Pilarczyk, M., Nowak, M., Podstawski, R., Wąsik, J. (2023). Development of muscle power of the 
lower limbs as a result of training according to the model of modified tactical periodization in young 
soccer players. Physical Activity Review, 11(2), 112–119 doi: 10.16926/par.2023.11.2 

Theodoropoulos, J. S., Bettle, J., Kosy, J. D. (2020). The use of GPS and inertial devices for player monitoring 
in  team  sports:  A  review  of  current  and  future  applications.  Orthopedic  Reviews,  12(1),  1–7. 
https://doi.org/10.4081/or.2020.7863 

Towlson, C., Watson, D. J., Cumming, S., Salter, J., Toner, J. (2023). Soccer academy practitioners’ perceptions 
e0274079. 

bio-banding. 

PLOS 

ONE, 

18(1), 

and 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0274079 

application 

of 

Wrigley, R., Drust, B., Stratton, G., Scott, M., Gregson, W. (2012). Quantification of the typical weekly in-season 
junior  soccer  players.  Journal  of  Sports  Sciences,  30(15),  1573–1580. 

in  elite 

training 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02640414.2012.709265 

load 

Journal of Human Kinetics, volume 94, October 2024 

http://www.johk.pl
