---
pmid: 39833538
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/39833538
title: Bothersome Pelvic Floor Dysfunction and Quality of Life During Pregnancy and Postpartum in Primiparous Women.
---

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:635–646 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00192-024-06038-1

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Bothersome Pelvic Floor Dysfunction and Quality of Life During 
Pregnancy and Postpartum in Primiparous Women

Sofia Nestor1,5 

 · Jan Brynhildsen2,3 · Ayako Hiyoshi3 · Markus Harry Jansson2,4

Received: 4 September 2024 / Accepted: 14 December 2024 / Published online: 20 January 2025 
© The Author(s) 2025

Abstract
Introduction and Hypothesis  This is a prospective cohort study based on the hypothesis that pregnancy and childbirth are associ-
ated with the occurrence of bothersome pelvic floor dysfunction (PFD), which impairs health-related quality of life (HRQoL).
Methods  Primiparous women completed a questionnaire including questions about bothersome PFD and HRQoL in early 
pregnancy, late pregnancy, 8 weeks postpartum, and 12 months postpartum. HRQoL was measured using the Incontinence 
Impact Questionnaire, Short Form (IIQ-7). The association between bothersome urinary incontinence (UI) 1 year postpartum 
and maternal and delivery characteristics was examined using generalized linear models.
Results  The study sample comprised 851 women. The prevalence of bothersome UI increased from 0.7% in early pregnancy 
to 8.1% at 1 year postpartum. At 1 year postpartum, 22.8% of the women reported PFD with impairment in HRQoL, with a 
median IIQ-7 score of 14.3. Bothersome UI in late pregnancy (adjusted RR 4.51, 95% CI 1.43–14.26) and 8 weeks postpartum 
(adjusted RR 10.17, 95% CI 5.45–18.98) were associated with bothersome UI 1 year postpartum.
Conclusions  Most women were not bothered by UI during pregnancy and up to 1 year postpartum and did not report PFD 
with impairment in HRQoL. Most women who reported PFD with impairment in HRQoL had low IIQ-7 scores, but a few 
women reported substantial restriction in lifestyle. Bothersome UI in late pregnancy and 8 weeks postpartum was predictive 
of bothersome UI 1 year postpartum. This indicates the importance of the early identification of these women to provide 
appropriate counseling and treatment.

Keywords  Urinary incontinence · Childbirth · Health-related quality of life · Pelvic floor disorder · Postpartum

Abbreviations
BMI 
FI 

 Body mass index
 Fecal incontinence

Handling Editor: G. Alessandro Digesu
Editor in Chief: Maria A. Bortolini

 *  Sofia Nestor 

sofia.nestor@regionorebrolan.se

1  Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty 

of Medicine and Health, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden
2  School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medicine, 

Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden

3  Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Faculty of Medicine 

and Health, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden
4  Department of Clinical Sciences, Danderyd Hospital, 

Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

5  Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Örebro 

University Hospital, Region Örebro County, PO Box 1613, 
701 16 Örebro, Sweden

HRQoL 
IIQ-7 

LUTS 
MUI 
PFD 
PFIQ-7 

POP 
POPRACT  
SUI 
UI 
UUI 

 Health-related quality of life
 Incontinence Impact Questionnaire, Short 
Form
 Lower urinary tract symptoms
 Mixed urinary incontinence
 Pelvic floor dysfunction
 Pelvic Floor Impact Questionnaire, Short 
Form
 Pelvic organ prolapse
 Pelvic Floor in Pregnancy and Childbirth
 Stress urinary incontinence
 Urinary incontinence
 Urgency urinary incontinence

Introduction

Pelvic floor dysfunction (PFD) is common in adult women 
[1] and has a great impact on health-related quality of life 
(HRQoL), including physical, psychological, and social 

Vol.:(0123456789) 
636 

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:635–646

well-being [2]. PFD comprises a wide variety of condi-
tions, including urinary incontinence (UI), fecal incon-
tinence (FI), and pelvic organ prolapse (POP) [3]. UI in 
women is divided into stress urinary incontinence (SUI), 
urgency urinary incontinence (UUI), or a combination of 
these, called mixed urinary incontinence (MUI) [3]. POP 
is the descent of any of the vaginal walls, the uterus, or 
the apex of the vagina. Sensation of tissue protrusion from 
the vagina, known as vaginal bulging, is the most specific 
symptom of POP [4]. It appears that both pregnancy per se 
and vaginal delivery may contribute to PFD, with UI being 
the most common early manifestation [5]. The extent to 
which pregnancy and vaginal delivery contribute to differ-
ent types of PFD appears to differ. The degree of inconven-
ience of UI and the impact on HRQoL rather than symptom 
severity appear to drive women to seek treatment [6].

Few  studies  have  evaluated  the  bother  of  UI  or  the 
impact of UI on HRQoL in women after childbirth [5, 
7–9]. Van Brummen et al. studied bothersome lower uri-
nary tract symptoms (LUTS) and found that bothersome 
SUI in early pregnancy and higher maternal age were pre-
dictive of bothersome SUI at 1 year postpartum. However, 
they concluded that, overall, most women were not both-
ered by their LUTS after their first delivery [8].

The role of delivery mode in the development of bother-
some UI and the delivery mode’s impact on HRQoL are 
unclear. Several studies have shown that UUI affects emo-
tional functioning more after a caesarean delivery, whereas 
the impact of SUI on emotional health and HRQoL did not 
differ according to mode of delivery [5, 7].

A prior publication from the cohort examined in this study 
showed that SUI was the predominant subtype of postpartum 
incontinence. At a population level, vaginal delivery was the 
major risk factor for SUI, followed by reporting SUI during 
pregnancy [10]. It is of great interest to investigate whether 
these symptoms actually bother the women, affecting their 
HRQoL during pregnancy and postpartum. To address this, 
we used data from the aforementioned large cohort study, 
which prospectively collected data from early pregnancy up 
to 1 year postpartum.

This study had three aims: first, to assess bothersome symp-
toms of PFD during pregnancy and up to 1 year postpartum; 
second, to study the impact of PFD on HRQoL; and third, to 
examine whether maternal factors and pregnancy and delivery 
characteristics affect the prevalence of bothersome UI.

Materials and Methods

Study Design and Population

A  prospective  cohort  study  (Pelvic  Floor  in  Preg-
nancy  and  Childbirth,  POPRACT)  was  conducted  in 

Region Örebro County, Sweden. The full description of the 
methodology has been published elsewhere [11]. Briefly, all 
eligible nulliparous women registering for maternity health 
care in early pregnancy from 1 October 2014 to 1 October 
2017 were invited to participate by their midwife. Exclusion 
criteria were insufficient knowledge of Swedish and a ges-
tational age > 15 weeks + 6 days. Participants completed a 
web-based questionnaire in early pregnancy, late pregnancy, 8 
weeks postpartum, and 12 months postpartum. The question-
naire in early pregnancy collected information on educational 
level, smoking, and whether urinary leakage had occurred 
before pregnancy. Data on height and weight were collected at 
1 year postpartum. All four questionnaires included questions 
on PFD [12], pelvic floor bother [4, 13], and HRQoL [13] 
(Appendix 1). The present study included women who com-
pleted the questionnaire on at least one of the four occasions.

Outcome Measures

We examined three outcomes in this study. For the first aim, 
we examined several types of bothersome PFD symptoms: 
UI, SUI, UUI, MUI, FI solid, FI liquid, and vaginal bulging. 
A bothersome symptom was defined if the woman reported 
having been bothered “moderately” or “quite a bit.” The 
questions and answer options are listed in Appendix 1. To 
study the impact of PFD on HRQoL for the second aim, 
HRQoL was measured using the Incontinence Impact Ques-
tionnaire, Short Form (IIQ-7) [14] (Appendix 2). It con-
sists of seven questions regarding physical activity, travel, 
social activity, and emotional health. The score ranges from 
0 to 100, and the higher the score, the worse the symptoms 
and the HRQoL. For the third aim, we used bothersome UI 
measured at 1 year postpartum.

Exposure Measures

The main exposure variables were time for the first and sec-
ond aims, and maternal factors and pregnancy and delivery 
characteristics for the third aim. Self-reported health was 
dichotomized as either good (“excellent,” “very good,” and 
“good”) or poor (“fair” and “bad”). Educational level was 
classified as elementary school, high school, or university. 
Body mass index (BMI) was calculated from the question-
naire at 1 year postpartum. It was grouped as ≤ 25, 25.1–30, 
or > 30. Age at delivery was grouped as ≤ 25, 26–30, or > 30 
years. Data concerning obstetric variables were extracted 
from the obstetric record system and from a study-specific 
delivery  protocol  including  data  on  perineal  tears  [15]. 
Delivery mode was grouped as spontaneous vaginal, vagi-
nal with vacuum extraction, or cesarean section. Perineal 
tears were categorized into three groups: no laceration or 
first-degree tears, second-degree tears, or obstetric anal 
sphincter injury. Birth weight was dichotomized as < 4,000 

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:635–646 

637

g and ≥ 4,000 g. UI before pregnancy, bothersome UI in late 
pregnancy, and bothersome UI at 8 weeks postpartum were 
examined to see whether they were associated with the risk 
of bothersome UI 1 year postpartum.

Statistical Analyses

For the first aim, we calculated the prevalence of bothersome 
symptoms at each time point. We then tested the difference 
in the prevalences among all time points using Cochran’s Q 
test. Although the prevalence was calculated using all avail-
able data, Cochran’s Q test was performed among those 
who completed questionnaires at all time points. For the 
second aim, we examined the distribution of IIQ-7 scores 
using prevalence, median, and range. The group report-
ing any pelvic floor symptoms with impairment in HRQoL 
(IIQ-7 > 0) was dichotomized into those scoring 0 points on 
the IIQ-7. We then used Cochran’s Q test to test differences 
in prevalence overall and made pairwise comparisons of all 
time points.

For the third aim, the associations of bothersome UI 1 
year postpartum with maternal factors and pregnancy and 
delivery characteristics were evaluated using generalized lin-
ear models, estimating risk ratios. Unadjusted and adjusted 
risk ratios were obtained. Adjustments were made for age 
and BMI. Any p values < 0.05 were considered statistically 
significant. Data were analyzed using version 16 of Stata/
SE (StataCorp LP).

Results

Of the 1,049 women included in the POPRACT study, 851 
completed the questionnaire on at least one of the four occa-
sions (Fig. 1). Most women were < 30 years of age, had a 
BMI < 30 kg/m2, were university educated, and had expe-
rienced a vaginal delivery (Table 1). Most women reported 
good or very good health in early pregnancy.

The prevalence of bothersome UI increased from 0.7% 
in early pregnancy to 8.1% at 1 year postpartum. There was 

Fig. 1   Flowchart illustrating the 
inclusion of the study sample. 
POPRACT  Pelvic Floor in Preg-
nancy and Childbirth

638 

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:635–646

Table 1   Maternal and obstetric baseline characteristics (N = 851)

Table 1   (continued)

Age

   ≤ 25 years
  26–30 years
  > 30 years
  Missing

BMI

  ≤ 25 kg/m2
  25.1–30 kg/m2
  > 30 kg/m2
  Missing

Educational level

  < 9 years
  9–12 years
  University
  Missing

Smoking
  Yes
  No
  Missing

Self-reported health in early pregnancy

  Excellent
  Very good
  Good
  Fair
  Bad
  Missing

UI before pregnancy

  Yes
  No
  Missing
Delivery mode
  Vaginal
  Vacuum extraction
  Cesarean section
  Missing
Perineal tear

  No injury or first degree
  Second degree
  Obstetric anal sphincter injury
  Missing
Birth weight
  < 4,000 g
  ≥ 4,000 g
  Missing

Manual perineal protection

  None
  Fetal head support only
  Perineal head support only
  Combined support
  Unspecified support

n (%)

158 (18.6)
427 (50.2)
255 (29.9)
11 (1.3)

404 (47.5)
179 (21.0)
100 (11.8)
168 (19.7)

14 (1.6)
277 (32.6)
521 (61.2)
39 (4.6)

20 (2.4)
789 (92.7)
42 (4.9)

117 (13.8)
420 (49.4)
256 (30.1)
19 (2.2)
2 (0.2)
37 (4.4)

90 (10.6)
761 (89.4)
0

577 (67.8)
135 (15.9)
128 (15.0)
11 (1.3)

262 (30.8)
256 (30.1)
40 (4.7)
293 (34.4)

698 (82.0)
140 (16.5)
13 (1.5)

29 (3.4)
22 (2.6)
73 (8.6)
363 (42.7)
160 (18.8)

  Missing
Episiotomy

  No
  Yes
  Missing

n (%)

204 (24.0)

515 (60.5)
50 (5.9)
286 (33.6)

BMI body mass index, UI urinary incontinence

also an increasing prevalence from late pregnancy to 1 year 
postpartum. When UI was divided into subgroups, bother-
some SUI was the most common subtype and the prevalence 
increased over time. The prevalence of bothersome MUI 
increased 1 year postpartum compared with early and late 
pregnancy. Very few women reported bothersome UUI and 
FI at all time points (Table 2).

The  prevalence  of  impaired  HRQoL  due  to  pelvic 
floor symptoms reported on IIQ-7 is presented in Table 3 
and Fig. 2. At 1 year postpartum, 158 women (22.8%) 
reported any pelvic floor symptoms involving impairment 
in HRQoL (IIQ-7 score > 0), with a median IIQ-7 score of 
14.3. The proportion of women reporting impairment in 
HRQoL increased from early pregnancy to all other time-
points. There was also an increasing prevalence from late 
pregnancy to 8 weeks postpartum and 1 year postpartum 
and from 8 weeks postpartum to 1 year postpartum. Over-
all, the scores were low, but a few outliers reported high 
scores. The most common symptom among those with 
impaired HRQoL 1 year postpartum was SUI, reported 
by 63 women (9.1%) with a median IIQ-7 score of 19.0 
(Table 3).

Table 4 shows the association of bothersome UI with 
maternal factors at 1 year postpartum, and the association 
of bothersome UI with pregnancy and delivery characteris-
tics at 1 year postpartum. Ninety women reported UI before 
pregnancy, and these women were excluded from the sec-
ond association. Among the maternal factors studied, UI 
before pregnancy was associated with bothersome UI 1 
year postpartum (adjusted RR 4.36, 95% CI 2.62–7.24). 
Among the pregnancy- and delivery-related factors studied, 
bothersome UI in late pregnancy (adjusted RR 4.51, 95% 
CI 1.43–14.26) and bothersome UI 8 weeks postpartum 
(adjusted RR 10.17, 95% CI 5.45–18.98) were associated 
with bothersome UI 1 year postpartum.

Discussion

In  this  large  prospective  cohort  study  of  primiparous 
women, we evaluated bothersome PFD and its impact on 
HRQoL during pregnancy and up to 1 year postpartum. 

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:635–646 

639

We found that the prevalence of bothersome UI increased 
significantly during pregnancy and up to 1 year postpar-
tum, and this increase was seen in the groups reporting 
bothersome  SUI  and  MUI.  Very  few  women  reported 
bothersome UUI and FI at any time point. Risk factors for 
bothersome UI 1 year postpartum were UI before preg-
nancy and bothersome UI in late pregnancy and at 8 weeks 
postpartum. Almost every fourth woman reported pelvic 
floor symptoms with an impact on HRQoL 1 year postpar-
tum, but the median scores in IIQ-7 were low and most 
women did not report any effect on HRQoL at all.

To the best of our knowledge, only one previous study 
has examined bothersome urinary symptoms during preg-
nancy and up to 1 year postpartum [8]. In contrast to our 
finding that bothersome UI increased during pregnancy and 
up to 1 year after childbirth, Van Brummen et al. found 
that the prevalence of bothersome LUTS was highest at 
week 36 of gestation and declined 1 year after pregnancy, 
suggesting that it might be part of normal pregnancy [8]. 
Palmieri et al. also found that bothersome PFD was more 
prevalent in pregnancy than postpartum, but they only fol-
lowed their cohort up to 6 weeks postpartum [16]. Van 
Brummen et al. found that bothersome SUI in early preg-
nancy and greater maternal age were predictive of bother-
some SUI 1 year after childbirth [8]. In the present study, 
the small number of women reporting bothersome UI in 
early pregnancy also reported UI before pregnancy, so we 
used that as a predictor of bothersome UI 1 year postpar-
tum. The finding that bothersome UI in late pregnancy and 
8 weeks postpartum were predictive of bothersome UI 1 
year postpartum is similar to the results of previous stud-
ies [17, 18]. However, both these previous studies focused 
on UI in general and not specifically on bothersome UI. 
Foldspang et al. reported that the highest risk of postpar-
tum UI was found among women complaining of UI dur-
ing pregnancy, which manifested as a crucial, independent 
precursor [18].

In the present study, few women reported bothersome 
FI at all time points. When comparing our lower FI preva-
lence figures with those reported in previous studies of FI 
not applying cut-offs based on bother [19, 20], it is clear 
that only a fraction of women with FI are bothered by it.

Few  studies  have  evaluated  the  impact  of  PFD  on 
HRQoL after pregnancy and childbirth [5, 7–9]. A minor-
ity of women with UI reported an impact on HRQoL in 
our study. Previous studies have reported various results. 
Dolan et al. reported that, during pregnancy, most women 
with UI experience minimal impact on HRQoL [9]. In 
contrast, in other studies UI had a significant impact on 
HRQoL during pregnancy [21, 22]. In a general popu-
lation, Coyne et al. reported that women with UUI and 
MUI had significantly worse HRQoL than did women 
with SUI [23]. This is similar to our finding that women 
with MUI and UUI had the highest median IIQ-7 score 1 
year postpartum; however, because the groups were small, 
it was not possible to conduct proper statistical evalua-
tions. Even though the impairment in HRQoL in our total 
sample is low, it should be noted that some outliers have 
very high scores. These few women have more extensive 
limitations in their daily activities. When looking at the 
detailed IIQ-7 answers 1 year postpartum (Appendix 3), 
it seems as though physical activity is the domain with 
the highest score. That is probably because SUI, the most 
common symptom, is closely associated with physical 
activity.

The association between delivery mode and bothersome 
UI 1 year postpartum did not reach statistical significance. 
However, this was not the main objective of the study. A 
larger study sample and a longer follow-up time would be 
required to establish the effect of delivery mode on bother-
some UI symptoms, as well as other bothersome PFD. Van 
Brummen et al. reported that women had more bothersome 
UUI after a cesarean delivery and more bothersome SUI 
after a vaginal delivery, but neither effect was statistically 

Table 2   The prevalence 
of bothersome pelvic floor 
symptoms during pregnancy 
and postpartum: reporting 
moderate to great bother 
was considered to indicate a 
bothersome symptom

Early preg-
nancy, n (%)

Late preg-
nancy, n (%)

8 weeks post-
partum, n (%)

1 year postpartum, n (%)

Urinary incontinence, overall

  Stress urinary incontinence
  Urgency urinary incontinence
  Mixed urinary incontinence

Fecal incontinence, liquid
Fecal incontinence, solid

6 (0.7)
1 (0.1)
3 (0.4)
2 (0.2)
6 (0.7)
2 (0.3)

28 (3.7)*
20 (2.7)*
3 (0.4)
3 (0.4)
9 (1.2)
3 (0.4)

40 (5.4)*
14 (1.9)*
7 (0.9)
12 (1.6)*
15 (2.0)
7 (0.9)

56 (8.1)*, **
27 (3.9)*, ***
6 (0.9)
17 (2.5)*, **
14 (2.0)
5 (0.7)

p values in the footnotes were obtained using Cochran’s Q test
*p < 0.05; reference early pregnancy
**p < 0.05; reference late pregnancy
***p < 0.05; reference 8 weeks postpartum

640 

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:635–646

Table 3   The prevalence of impaired health-related quality of life due to pelvic floor symptoms from early pregnancy to 1 year postpartum

Early pregnancy

Late pregnancy

8 weeks postpartum

1 year postpartum

Total number of participants
Any pelvic floor symptom with impairment in  HRQoLa

814

761

746

694

  n (%)
  IIQ-7 median
  Minimum to maximum
Stress urinary incontinence

  n (%)
  IIQ-7 median
  Minimum to maximum
Urgency urinary incontinence

  n (%)
  IIQ-7 median
  Minimum to maximum
Mixed urinary incontinence

  n (%)
  IIQ-7 median
  Minimum to maximum

Vaginal bulging

  n (%)
  IIQ-7 median
  Minimum to maximum
Fecal incontinence, liquid

  n (%)
  IIQ-7 median
  Minimum to maximum

Fecal incontinence, solid

  n (%)
  IIQ-7 median
  Minimum to maximum

27 (3.3)
19.0
4.8–76.2

4 (0.5)
14.3
4.8–38.1

6 (0.7)
14.3
4.8–42.9

3 (0.7)
28.6
28.6–42.9

3 (0.4)
38.1
14.3–76.2

3 (0.4)
33.3
19.0–47.6

1 (0.1)
19.0

95 (12.5)*
19.0
4.8–90.5

39 (5.1)
14.3
4.8–71.4

4 (0.5)
19.0
4.8–52.4

19 (2.5)
14.3
4.8–66.7

8 (1.1)
16.7
9.5–71.4

10 (1.3)
30.9
4.8–76.2

3 (0.4)
33.3
28.6–61.9

132 (17.7)*, **
14.3
4.8–90.5

158 (22.8)*, **, ***
14.3
4.8–95.2

37 (5.0)
14.3
4.8–80.9

9 (1.2)
9.5
4.8–38.1

20 (2.7)
28.6
4.8–71.4

33 (4.4)
28.6
4.8–90.5

20 (2.7)
19.0
4.8–71.4

11 (1.5)
9.5
4.8–47.6

63 (9.1)
19.0
4.8–95.2

11 (1.9)
28.6
9.5–52.4

30 (4.3)
26.2
4.8–90.5

35 (5.0)
19.0
4.8–90.5

23 (3.3)
14.3
4.8–47.6

7 (1.0)
23.8
9.5–42.9

IIQ-7 scores are presented as medians and ranges for all types of pelvic floor dysfunction. Participants reporting any impairment are presented in 
absolute numbers (n) and percentages; p values in the footnotes were obtained using Cochran’s Q test
IIQ-7 Incontinence Impact Questionnaire, Short Form
*p < 0.05; reference early pregnancy
**p < 0.05; reference late pregnancy
***p < 0.05; reference 8 weeks postpartum
a A woman reporting any pelvic floor symptoms and who had IIQ-7 > 0

significant [8]. As other previous studies of postpartum 
UI have not focused on bothersome UI, we cannot entirely 
compare our results with theirs [5, 7, 17,  18]. It would 
have been interesting to include UI subgroups as well as 
bothersome FI in the association analysis, but the groups 
were too small.

Strengths and limitations

A strength of this study is the prospective data collection 
from early pregnancy to 1 year postpartum. As the study 
sample comprised only primiparous women, the results 

were not influenced by previous pregnancy or childbirth. 
In general, the likelihood of recall bias is low in studies 
of prospective design. We consider it a strength to focus 
on bothersome PFD and impairment in HRQoL, because 
these, rather than symptom severity, are the forces that 
drive women to seek treatment [6]. Our questionnaire was 
a compilation of questions derived from various validated 
questionnaires. Compiling questions from several ques-
tionnaires may influence the validated characteristics of 
the questions [24]. Unfortunately, the questionnaire did 
not include any questions about bothersome vaginal bulg-
ing, limiting our understanding of how this symptom may 

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:635–646 

641

Fig. 2   Box-plot of Incontinence 
Impact Questionnaire, Short 
Form (IIQ-7) scores during 
pregnancy and postpartum

bother women. The IIQ-7 is a standardized validated ques-
tionnaire for UI. In this study, we used a modified Swed-
ish version asking about several pelvic floor symptoms, 
but the answer categories were not divided into different 
symptoms as in the PFIQ-7. Therefore, we cannot tell what 
PFD symptoms may have affected the HRQoL. Another 
limitation of IIQ-7 is that the questionnaire is constructed 
for condition-specific HRQoL among women with UI in 
clinical practice and is not validated for young women who 
have recently given birth. This has probably introduced 
floor  effects,  i.e.,  that  most  respondents  score  0  points 
on the IIQ-7, making it difficult to manage and analyze 
the data. Finally, our definitions of bothersome PFD are 
not standardized or based on any core outcome set, as no 
core outcome set is available in this field [25]. There is an 
urgent need to define a core outcome set for PFD to make 
the results of different studies comparable.

Our findings indicate a low overall prevalence of bother-
some UI during pregnancy and up to 1 year after first child-
birth and that most women did not report PFD with impair-
ment in HRQoL. This is a reassuring message for pregnant 
women. However, the minority of women actually suffer-
ing from bothersome UI and other PFD must be identified 
and adequately counseled in postnatal care. Studies have 

shown that women with SUI during first pregnancy or 3 
months after first delivery are at a particularly high risk of 
long-lasting symptoms 5–15 years after childbirth [26, 27]. 
Altogether, this further supports the introduction of preven-
tive measures, such as pelvic floor muscle training during 
pregnancy [28].

Conclusions

The prevalence of bothersome UI increased during preg-
nancy and postpartum, suggesting that both pregnancy 
and childbirth might contribute to these symptoms. Most 
women were not bothered by UI or any other PFD during 
pregnancy and up to 1 year after their first childbirth, and 
did not report any pelvic floor symptoms causing impair-
ment in HRQoL. However, there is a need to emphasize that 
a small number of women reported more extensive limita-
tions in their daily living. Bothersome UI in late pregnancy 
and 8 weeks postpartum were predictive of bothersome UI 
1 year postpartum. These results indicate the importance of 
identifying these women during pregnancy and at the post-
natal check-up in order to provide appropriate counseling 
and treatment to reduce their problems.

642 

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:635–646

Table 4   Association of maternal factors with bothersome UI at 1 year postpartum and of pregnancy and delivery characteristics and bothersome 
UI at 1 year postpartum

No bothersome UI, 
n (%)

Bothersome UI, 
n (%)

Unadjusted RR (95% CI)

Adjusted RR (95% CI)

Maternal factors

  Self-reported health in early pregnancy
    Good
    Poor
  Educational level
    < 9 years
    9–12 years
    University
  Smoking
    No
    Yes
  UI before pregnancy
    No
    Yes
  BMI
    ≤ 25
    25.1–30
    > 30
  Age
    ≤ 25 years
    26–30 years
    > 30 years

Pregnancy and delivery characteristics

  Delivery mode
    Vaginal
    Vacuum extraction
    Cesarean section
  Perineal tear
    No injury or first degree
    Second degree
    Obstetric anal sphincter injuries
  Birth weight
    < 4,000 g
    ≥ 4,000 g
  Bothersome UI in late pregnancy
    No
    Yes
  Bothersome UI 8 weeks postpartum
    No
    Yes

Adjusted model adjusted for age and BMI

12 (92.3)
594 (92.0)

8 (88.9)
200 (92.2)
396 (91.9)

12 (85.7)
592 (92.1)

577 (94.0)
51 (73.9)

375 (92.8)
163 (91.1)
90 (90.0)

114 (91.9)
326 (92.4)
198 (91.2)

389 (92.6)
96 (95.0)
92 (98.9)

173 (91.5)
182 (92.2)
30 (96.8)

469 (81.4)
107 (83.8)

526 (98.3)
9 (91.2)

533 (97.4)
14 (70.6)

1 (7.7)
52 (8.0)

1 (11.1)
17 (7.8)
35 (8.1)

2 (14.3)
51 (7.9)

37 (6.0)
18 (26.1)

29 (7.2)
16 (8.9)
10 (10.0)

10 (8.1)
27 (7.6)
19 (8.8)

31 (7.4)
5 (5.0)
1 (1.1)

16 (8.5)
14 (7.1)
1 (3.2)

31 (18.6)
6 (16.2)

31 (1.7)
3 (8.8)

24 (2.6)
10 (29.4)

–
0.95 (0.14–6.38)

1.37 (0.20–9.16)
–
0.99 (0.57–1.70)

–
1.80 (0.49–6.65)

–
0.96 (0.14–6.43)

1.39 (0.19–8.76)
–
1.10 (0.60–1.99)

–
1.71 (0.45–6.46)

–
4.22 (2.55–6.99)*

–
4.36 (2.62–7.24)*

–
1.25 (0.69–2.23)
1.39 (0.70–2.76)

–
0.95 (0.47–1.90)
1.09 (0.52–2.26)

–
0.63 (0.25–1.59)
0.14 (0.02–1.03)

–
0.82 (0.041–1.61)
0.37 (0.05–2.69)

–
0.85 (0.36–1.98)

–
–
–

–
–
–

–
0.69 (0.27–1.72)
0.14 (0.021–1.05)

–
0.88 (0.44–1.77)
0.42 (0.06–3.04)

–
0.84 (0.36–1.96)

–
4.42 (1.57–12.46)*

–
4.51 (1.43–14.26)*

–
9.04 (4.89–16.71)*

–

10.17 (5.45–18.98)*, a

In the pregnancy and delivery characteristics, women with UI before pregnancy were excluded from the analysis
BMI body mass index, UI urinary incontinence
* p < 0.05
a Age was grouped into ≤ 30 and > 30 years because the model did not have convergence with three age categories

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:635–646 

643

Appendix 1

Table 5 shows questions on urinary leakage, fecal incontinence, 
and symptoms of prolapse. 

Table 5   Questions on urinary leakage, fecal incontinence, and symptoms of prolapse

Outcome and corresponding question

Answer options Definition of outcome

Urinary leakage overall

    If Yes, how much does it bother you? [13]

  Q1: Do you occasionally experience urinary leakage? [12] Yes
No
Not at all
Somewhat
Moderately
Quite a bit

UUI

  Q2: Do you occasionally experience a sudden need to 
urinate and then have difficulty reaching the toilet in 
time? [4]

SUI

  Q3: Do you leak urine when coughing, sneezing, lifting, 

or during physical activities? [4]

MUI

  Questions #2 and #3

FI, liquid

  Q4: Do you usually lose stool beyond your control if your 

stool is loose? [13]

    If Yes, how much does it bother you? [13]

FI, solid

  Q5: Do you usually lose stool beyond your control if your 

stool is well formed? [13]

    If Yes, how much does it bother you? [13]

Symptom of prolapse

  Q6: Do you have a sensation of tissue protruding from 

your vagina (vaginal bulge)? [4]

Yes, often
Sometimes
Infrequently
No, never

Yes, often
Sometimes
Infrequently
No, never

Yes
No
Not at all
Somewhat
Moderately
Quite a bit

Yes
No
Not at all
Somewhat
Moderately
Quite a bit

Yes, often
Sometimes
Infrequently
No, never

Answering “Moderately” or “Quite a bit” Q1 → Bothersome 

UI overall

Answering “Yes, often” or “Sometimes” on Q2 and “Infre-

quently” or “No, never” on Q3 → UUI; UUI + Q1 = moder-
ately or quite a bit → Bothersome UUI

“Yes, often” or “Sometimes” on Q3 and “Infrequently” or 

“No, never” on Q2 → SUI; SUI + Q1 = moderately or quite a 
bit → Bothersome SUI

“Yes, often” or “Sometimes” to both question #2 and 

#3 → MUI; MUI + Q1 = moderately or quite a bit → Bother-
some MUI

Answering “Moderately” or “Quite a bit” Q4 → Bothersome 

FI liquid

Answering “Moderately” or “Quite a bit” Q5 → Bothersome FI

Answering “Yes, often” or “Sometimes” Q6

UI  urinary  incontinence,  UUI  urge  urinary  incontinence,  SUI  stress  urinary  incontinence,  MUI  mixed  urinary  incontinence,  FI  fecal  inconti-
nence

644 

Appendix 2

The questions of the IIQ-7 are shown below [14].

Do any symptoms from the pelvic floor bother you? (uri-

nary leakage, gas/stool leakage, prolapse)

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:635–646

–  Slightly
–  Moderately
–  Quite a bit

•  Ability to travel by car or bus for a distance greater than 

30 min away from home?

a.  Yes
b.  No

 If yes, to what extent do those symptoms affect your:

–  Not at all
–  Slightly
–  Moderately
–  Quite a bit

•  Ability to do household chores (cooking, housecleaning, 

•  Participation in social activities outside your home?

laundry)?

–  Not at all
–  Slightly
–  Moderately
–  Quite a bit

•  Ability to do physical activity such as walking, swim-

ming, or other exercise?

–  Not at all
–  Slightly
–  Moderately
–  Quite a bit

•  Entertainment activities such as going to a movies or 

concert?

–  Not at all

–  Not at all
–  Slightly
–  Moderately
–  Quite a bit

•  Emotional health (nervousness, depression, etc.)?

–  Not at all
–  Slightly
–  Moderately
–  Quite a bit

•  Feeling frustrated?

–  Not at all
–  Slightly
–  Moderately
–  Quite a bit

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:635–646 

645

Appendix 3

Table 6   (continued)

The answers given to the IIQ-7 at 1 year postpartum are 
shown in Table 6. 

Table 6   Incontinence  Impact  Questionnaire,  Short  Form  answers  at 
1 year postpartum

1 year postpartum
n (%)

Do any symptoms from the pelvic floor bother you? (urinary leakage, gas/

stool leakage, prolapse)

  Total

  Yes

  No

  Missing

694

200 (28.8)

494 (71.2)

0

If yes, to what extent do those symptom affect your

  Ability to do household chores (cooking, housecleaning, laundry)?

    Total

    Not at all

    Slightly

    Moderately

    Quite a bit

    Missing

200

169 (84.5)

18 (9.0)

5 (2.5)

7 (3.5)

1 (0.5)

  Ability to do physical activity such as walking, swimming, or other 

exercise?

    Total

    Not at all

    Slightly

    Moderately

    Quite a bit

    Missing

200

59 (29.5)

88 (44.0)

38 (19.0)

13 (6.5)

2 (1.0)

  Entertainment activities such as going to a movies or concert?

    Total

    Not at all

    Slightly

    Moderately

    Quite a bit

    Missing

200

151 (75.5)

29 (14.4)

13 (6.5)

6 (3.0)

1 (1.0)

  Ability to travel by car or bus for a distance greater than 30 min away 

from home?

    Total

    Not at all

    Slightly

    Moderately

    Quite a bit

    Missing

200

153 (76.5)

30 (15.0)

7 (3.5)

8 (4.0)

2 (1.0)

  Participation in social activities outside your home?

    Total

    Not at all

    Slightly

    Moderately

    Quite a bit

    Missing

200

135 (67.5)

49 (24.5)

6 (3.0)

9 (4.5)

1 (0.5)

  Emotional health (nervousness, depression, etc.)?

    Total

    Not at all

200

104 (52.0)

    Slightly

    Moderately

    Quite a bit

    Missing

  Feeling frustrated?

    Total

    Not at all

    Slightly

    Moderately

    Quite a bit

    Missing

1 year postpartum
n (%)

67 (33.5)

19 (9.5)

8 (4.0)

2 (1.0)

200

100 (50.0)

67 (33.5)

21 (10.5)

11 (5.5)

1 (0.5)

Acknowledgements  We wish to thank all the midwives and physicians 
involved in the data collection and research, especially the midwives 
Anette Trygg and Carina Henriksson, who coordinated the data collec-
tion. The authors would also like to thank senior professor Kerstin Nilsson 
and senior lecturer Karin Franzén, both at the School of Medical Sciences, 
Örebro University, Sweden, for initial planning of the POPRACT study.

Authors’ Contributions  S. Nestor: data analysis, manuscript writing; J. 
Brynhildsen: manuscript editing; A. Hiyoshi: support for data analysis; 
M.H. Jansson: project development, data collection, manuscript editing.

Funding  The POPRACT study was funded by the Örebro University 
Hospital Research Foundation (grant no. OLL-410421) and the Swed-
ish Society of Medicine (grant no. SLS-250351). The present sub-study 
was performed as a scientific project during specialist medical training 
and was funded by Region Örebro County.

Data Availability  The data that support the findings of this study are 
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Declarations 

Ethical  Considerations  Ethical  approval  was  obtained  from  the 
Regional Ethical Review Board in Stockholm (registration number 
2014/124–32). Participation was voluntary and all participants pro-
vided written informed consent upon recruitment.

Conflicts of Interest  None.

Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

646 

References

  1.  Tegerstedt  G,  Maehle-Schmidt  M,  Nyren  O,  Hammarstrom 
M.  Prevalence  of  symptomatic  pelvic  organ  prolapse  in  a 
Swedish population. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct. 
2005;16(6):497–503.

  2.  Pizzol D, Demurtas J, Celotto S, Maggi S, Smith L, Angiolelli G, 
et al. Urinary incontinence and quality of life: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Aging Clin Exp Res. 2021;33(1):25–35.
  3.  Haylen BT, de Ridder D, Freeman RM, Swift SE, Berghmans 
B, Lee J, et al. An International Urogynecological Association 
(IUGA)/International Continence Society (ICS) joint report on 
the terminology for female pelvic floor dysfunction. Int Urogy-
necol J. 2010;21(1):5–26.

  4.  Tegerstedt G, Miedel A, Maehle-Schmidt M, Nyren O, Ham-
marstrom M. A short-form questionnaire identified genital organ 
prolapse. J Clin Epidemiol. 2005;58(1):41–6.

  5.  Liang CC, Wu MP, Lin SJ, Lin YJ, Chang SD, Wang HH. Clinical 
impact of and contributing factors to urinary incontinence in women 
5 years after first delivery. Int Urogynecol J. 2013;24(1):99–104.
  6.  Gil KM, Somerville AM, Cichowski S, Savitski JL. Distress and quality 
of life characteristics associated with seeking surgical treatment for 
stress urinary incontinence. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2009;7:8.

  7.  Van Brummen HJ, Bruinse HW, van de Pol G, Heintz AP, van der 
Vaart CH. The effect of vaginal and cesarean delivery on lower 
urinary tract symptoms: what makes the difference? Int Urogy-
necol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct. 2007;18(2):133–9.

  8.  Van Brummen HJ, Bruinse HW, van de Pol G, Heintz AP, van 
der Vaart CH. Bothersome lower urinary tract symptoms 1 year 
after first delivery: prevalence and the effect of childbirth. BJU 
Int. 2006;98(1):89–95.

  9.  Dolan LM, Walsh D, Hamilton S, Marshall K, Thompson K, Ashe 
RG. A study of quality of life in primigravidae with urinary inconti-
nence. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct. 2004;15(3):160–4.
 10.  Jansson MH, Franzen K, Tegerstedt G, Hiyoshi A, Nilsson K. 
Stress and urgency urinary incontinence one year after a first 
birth—prevalence and risk factors. A prospective cohort study. 
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2021;100(12):2193–201.

 11.  Jansson MH, Franzen K, Hiyoshi A, Tegerstedt G, Dahlgren H, 
Nilsson K. Risk factors for perineal and vaginal tears in primi-
parous women—the prospective POPRACT-cohort study. BMC 
Pregnancy Childbirth. 2020;20(1):749.

 12.  Luthander C, Emilsson T, Ljunggren G, Hammarstrom M. A ques-
tionnaire on pelvic floor dysfunction postpartum. Int Urogynecol 
J. 2011;22(1):105–13.

 13.  Teleman P, Stenzelius K, Iorizzo L, Jakobsson U. Validation of 
the Swedish short forms of the Pelvic Floor Impact Question-
naire (PFIQ-7), Pelvic Floor Distress Inventory (PFDI-20) and 
Pelvic Organ Prolapse/Urinary Incontinence Sexual Questionnaire 
(PISQ-12). Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2011;90(5):483–7.
 14.  Franzen K, Johansson JE, Karlsson J, Nilsson K. Validation of the 
Swedish version of the Incontinence Impact Questionnaire and 
the Urogenital Distress Inventory. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 
2013;92(5):555–61.

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:635–646

 15.  Jansson MH, Nilsson K, Franzen K. Development and validation 
of a protocol for documentation of obstetric perineal lacerations. 
Int Urogynecol J. 2019;30(12):2069–76.

 16.  Palmieri S, De Bastiani SS, Degliuomini R, Ruffolo AF, Casiraghi 
A, Vergani P, et al. Prevalence and severity of pelvic floor disor-
ders in pregnant and postpartum women. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 
2022;158(2):346–51.

 17.  Burgio KL, Zyczynski H, Locher JL, Richter HE, Redden DT, 
Wright KC. Urinary incontinence in the 12-month postpartum 
period. Obstet Gynecol. 2003;102(6):1291–8.

 18.  Foldspang A, Hvidman L, Mommsen S, Nielsen JB. Risk of post-
partum urinary incontinence associated with pregnancy and mode 
of delivery. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2004;83(10):923–7.
 19.  Jansson MH, Franzen K, Tegerstedt G, Brynhildsen J, Hiyoshi A, 
Nilsson K. Fecal incontinence and associated pelvic floor dysfunc-
tion during and one year after the first pregnancy. Acta Obstet 
Gynecol Scand. 2023;102(8):1034–44.

 20.  Brown SJ, Gartland D, Donath S, MacArthur C. Fecal incon-
tinence during the first 12 months postpartum: complex causal 
pathways and implications for clinical practice. Obstet Gynecol. 
2012;119(2 Pt 1):240–9.

 21.  Wang X, Jin Y, Xu P, Feng S. Urinary incontinence in pregnant 
women and its impact on health-related quality of life. Health 
Qual Life Outcomes. 2022;20(1):13.

 22.  Rogers RG, Ninivaggio C, Gallagher K, Borders AN, Qualls C, 
Leeman LM. Pelvic floor symptoms and quality of life changes 
during first pregnancy: a prospective cohort study. Int Urogynecol 
J. 2017;28(11):1701–7.

 23.  Coyne KS, Zhou Z, Thompson C, Versi E. The impact on health-
related quality of life of stress, urge and mixed urinary inconti-
nence. BJU Int. 2003;92(7):731–5.

 24.  Fayers PM, Machin D. Quality of life: the assessment, analysis and 
reporting of patient-reported outcomes. Chichester: Wiley; 2016.
 25.  Dwyer PL, Riss P, Haylen BT. Does it matter what we measure? 
Core outcomes, the IUJ and the CROWN and COMET initiatives. 
Int Urogynecol J. 2014;25(10):1301–2.

 26.  Dolan LM, Hosker GL, Mallett VT, Allen RE, Smith AR. Stress 
incontinence and pelvic floor neurophysiology 15 years after the 
first delivery. BJOG. 2003;110(12):1107–14.

 27.  Viktrup L, Lose G. The risk of stress incontinence 5 years after 

first delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2001;185(1):82–7.

 28.  Woodley  SJ,  Lawrenson  P,  Boyle  R,  Cody  JD,  Morkved  S, 
Kernohan A, et al. Pelvic floor muscle training for prevent-
ing  and  treating  urinary  and  faecal  incontinence  in  ante-
natal  and  postnatal  women.  Cochrane  Database  Syst  Rev. 
2020;5(5):CD007471.

Publisher's  Note  Springer  Nature  remains  neutral  with  regard  to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
