---
pmid: 39833539
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/39833539
title: Three-dimensional Analysis of the Distribution of Smooth and Skeletal Muscle Tissue Around the Female Urethra.
---

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:647–654 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00192-025-06045-w

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Three‑dimensional Analysis of the Distribution of Smooth and Skeletal 
Muscle Tissue Around the Female Urethra

Tong Liu1 · Satoru Muro1 · Suthasinee Tharnmanularp2 · Keiichi Akita1 

Received: 20 November 2024 / Accepted: 23 December 2024 / Published online: 20 January 2025 
© The Author(s) 2025

Abstract
Introduction and Hypothesis  The urethra is surrounded by layers of smooth muscle, including inner longitudinal and outer 
circler muscles, as well as the skeletal muscle of the external urethral sphincter. However, the extent of these muscles and 
their relationship with the levator ani (LA) remain unclear. This study aimed to clarify the composition of muscle layers 
around the female urethra and their three-dimensional arrangements.
Methods  Pelvises from five female cadavers were collected for histological analysis. The surrounding urethral tissue was 
serially sectioned and stained with Elastica van Gieson stain to identify the connective and muscular tissues. Immunohisto-
logical staining with an anti-smooth muscle antibody was performed to confirm the distribution of the smooth and skeletal 
muscles. Thereafter, muscle layers were three-dimensionally reconstructed on the basis of serial histological sections.
Results  The female urethra was surrounded by four muscle layers arranged from inner to outer layers in the following order: 
longitudinal smooth muscle, circular smooth muscle, the external urethral sphincter (EUS), and an outermost smooth muscle 
layer. These muscles surrounded the urethra and partially extended anteriorly. Moreover, smooth muscle fibers extending 
from the vagina were found between the LA and EUS.
Conclusions  This study clarified the distribution of muscle tissue surrounding the female urethra, showing that the EUS is 
connected to the LA through the outermost smooth muscle layer. Thus, urination control likely involves both the urethral 
muscle layers and the pelvic floor muscles.

Keywords  External urethral sphincter · Female urethral function · Levator ani · Urinary incontinence

Introduction

Recently, urinary incontinence in women caused by pelvic 
floor muscle injuries or other diseases has gained attention 
[1]. Understanding the muscular anatomy, including the dis-
tribution of muscles surrounding the urethra, is essential to 
fully understand the mechanisms of female urination and the 
pathological causes of urinary incontinence.

Handling Editor: G. Alessandro Digesu
Editor in Chief: Maria A. Bortolini

 *  Keiichi Akita 

akita.fana@tmd.ac.jp

1  Department of Clinical Anatomy, Tokyo Medical and Dental 

University (TMDU), 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-Ku, 
Tokyo 113-8510, Japan

2  Princess Srisavangavadhana College of Medicine, 
Chulabhorn Royal Academy, Bangkok, Thailand

According to anatomical texts and several studies, the 
female urethra is surrounded by two smooth muscle layers: 
an inner longitudinal layer and an outer circular layer [2–5]. 
However, some studies suggest dividing the smooth muscle 
into three layers: the inner longitudinal layer, the outer cir-
cular layer, and the outermost longitudinal muscle layer [6, 
7]. Outside the smooth muscle layers is a horseshoe-shaped 
skeletal muscle that encircles the urethra, commonly referred 
to as the external urethral sphincter (EUS) [8–10]. Research 
on the relationship between the peri-urethral and pelvic floor 
muscles in female individuals suggests that the inferior part 
of the EUS is firmly attached to the levator ani (LA) by a 
tendon in female fetuses [11].

Previous anatomical studies by Muro et al. showed that 
the pelvic floor consists of widespread skeletal and smooth 
muscles, suggesting that their interactions create its func-
tion [12–14]. In male individuals, the urethra is located 
immediately anterior to the rectum, and both the urethra 
and the anorectal canal are connected by skeletal and smooth 

Vol.:(0123456789) 
648 

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:647–654

muscles, suggesting a functional relationship [15, 16]. In 
female individuals, the urethra is located anterior to the 
vagina. Kato et al. reported that the smooth muscle sur-
rounding the female urethra is more extensive than previ-
ously thought and linked to the smooth muscle surrounding 
the vagina. Moreover, the LA and smooth muscle fibers were 
in direct contact, playing an important role around the ure-
thra as a mediator between the pubis, urethra, and LA. This 
structure suggests that the urethra is supported by the vagina, 
LA, and pubic bone [4]. However, the extent of these smooth 
and skeletal muscles and the impact of muscle distribution at 
different urethral levels on urination remain unclear.

This  study  aimed  to  clarify  the  layered  structure  of 
smooth and skeletal muscles distributed around the female 
urethra, particularly in relation to the LA muscle. Through 
this research, we hope to contribute to the clinical treatment 
of urinary incontinence, focusing on developing surgical 
techniques.

Three‑dimensional Reconstruction

Using the SrfII software (ver. R.11.00.00.0-H, Ratoc, Tokyo, 
Japan;  http:// www. ratoc. com/ eng/ index. html)  to  get  the 
three-dimensional reconstruction, the female urethra and 
surrounding muscles were examined. Serial transverse sec-
tions from the two histologically examined blocks (from 
donors aged 81 and 79) were used for three-dimensional 
reconstructions. For the peri-urethral block, 37 slides cov-
ering the entire length of the urethra were chosen, and the 
EUS, smooth muscle, longitudinal smooth muscle, and cir-
cular smooth muscle surrounding the urethra were manually 
segmented after scanning all 78 serial sections. For the lat-
eral urethral block, the structures (EUS, ligament, LA, pubic 
bone, smooth muscle, longitudinal and circular smooth mus-
cles surrounding the urethra, urethra, vagina, and smooth 
muscle from the vaginal wall) were manually segmented 
after scanning all 35 serial sections. This technique was 
similar to that used in previous reports [17].

Materials and Methods

Ethical Approval

The five female cadavers used in this study were provided 
by our department, following the “Act on Body Donation 
for Medical and Dental Education.” Each donor voluntarily 
agreed to donate their body parts for research and teaching 
before death after being informed about the procedures. We 
informed the bereaved family of the deceased’s consent after 
their passing and ensured no conflicts of interest existed. 
We displayed posters about the study and shared its results. 
All cadavers underwent arterial perfusion with 8% formalin 
and were preserved in a 30% alcohol solution. Donors with 
a history of pelvic anomalies were excluded from the study. 
All procedures complied with relevant standards and laws.

Histology

For histological analysis, all pelvises from donors (ages at 
death 81, 79, 75, 84, and 75 years) were used. Two peri-
urethral and three lateral urethral specimens were obtained. 
Among them, one peri-urethral specimen, approximately 
8 cm thick, and one lateral urethral specimen, approximately 
3.5 cm thick, were selected for histological observation 
through wide-range serial sectioning [17]. These two blocks 
were fixed in 10% formalin, dehydrated, embedded in paraf-
fin, and sectioned into 5-μm thick sections at 1 mm intervals.
Elastica van Gieson staining was used to identify connec-
tive and muscular tissues in the histological sections. Immu-
nostaining with anti-smooth actin (Ab-5694) was performed 
to confirm the distribution of smooth and skeletal muscle 
fibers. The specific steps have been previously described 
[4, 15, 17–20].

The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of our 
Institute (approval number: M2018-006). All methods were 
performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and 
regulations.

Results

Distribution of Muscle Tissue Around the Female 
Urethra

The distribution of smooth and skeletal muscle tissues 
around  the  female  urethra  was  identified  using  immu-
nostaining with an anti-smooth muscle antibody and EVG 
staining to highlight the striated structure of muscle cells, 
respectively. From the 78 horizontal sections around the 
urethra, four representative levels, from proximal to distal, 
are shown (Figs. 1 and 2). In the upper urethra, the muscle 
layers were arranged from inner to outer as follows: lon-
gitudinal smooth muscle of the urethra (uLM), circular 
smooth muscle of the urethra (uCM), and skeletal muscle 
layers, which were identified as the EUS (Fig. 2a–c). Fur-
thermore, the outermost smooth muscle tissue protruded 
anterolaterally and extended the muscle fibers toward the 
pubic  bone  (Fig.  2b–c,  arrowheads).  This  finding  was 
observed in two specimens which included the pubic bone. 
A 7 mm section distal to the previous section is shown in 
Fig. 2d–f. Muscle layers around the urethra were arranged 
in the same order. The skeletal muscle surrounded the 

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:647–654 

649

Fig. 1   Illustration of female pel-
vic halves in the median plane 
(right side). Lines 1–4 indicate 
the level at which representative 
slides were selected. Bl bladder, 
Pu pubic bone, Re rectum, U 
uterus, Ur urethra, V vagina, VV 
vaginal vestibule

Fig. 2   Histology  of  the  smooth  and  skeletal  muscular  tissue  around 
the urethra. Transverse histological sections of the smooth and skel-
etal  muscles  around  the  female  urethra  were  obtained  using  EVG 
staining (a, d, g, and j) and immunostaining with an anti-smooth mus-
cle antibody (b, e, h, and k). a–c Section of the proximal part of the 
female urethra located 11 mm from the urethral–vesical junction. The 
muscle tissue was arranged in the order of the uLM, uCM, and skel-
etal muscle from the inner to the outer layers, identified as the EUS. 
The  outermost  smooth  muscle  tissue  protruded  anterolaterally  and 
extended the muscle fibers toward the pubic bone. d–f Section 7 mm 
from  the  inferior  surface  of  a–c,  in  which  the  skeletal  muscle  sur-

rounded the urethra in a horseshoe shape, lacked muscle fibers poste-
riorly. Posteriorly, in the urethra, the uCM and outermost smooth lay-
ers continued with each other (e, star). g–i A section 3 mm from the 
inferior surface of d–f. In the section at the distal part of the urethra, 
uLM  and  uCM  extended  anteriorly  to  separate  the  skeletal  muscle 
layers (h, i, and dagger). j–l A section 7 mm from the inferior surface 
of g–i where no skeletal muscle was observed. EUS, external urethral 
sphincter; Re, rectum; sm, smooth muscle; uLM, longitudinal smooth 
muscles  surrounding  the  urethra;  uCM,  circular  smooth  muscle  sur-
rounding the urethra; Ur, urethra; V, vagina; Vm, smooth muscle from 
the vaginal wall

650 

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:647–654

urethra in a horseshoe shape and lacked muscle fibers pos-
teriorly. In the urethra, the uCM and outermost smooth 
layers merged posteriorly (Fig. 2e, star). Sections 3 mm 
distal to Fig. 2d are shown in Fig. 2g–i. uLM and uCM 
extended anteriorly to separate the skeletal muscle layers 
(Fig. 2h and i, dagger). Figure 2j–l show sections 7 mm 
below the previous section. No skeletal muscle layers are 
observed at this level.

Three-dimensional reconstructed images of the mus-
cular tissue surrounding the female urethra were made 
according to the distribution of muscle tissue in the female 
urethra (Fig. 3). The urethra was curved, with the distal 
part curved forward along the vagina. The entire urethra 
was lined with uLM (Fig. 3a and b) and covered with a 
uCM layer (Fig. 3c and d). The middle part of the urethra 
was surrounded by skeletal muscle identified as the EUS 
(Fig. 3e); however, this muscle does not fully encircle the 
urethra, leaving the dorsal side uncovered (Fig. 3f). The 
ventral part of this muscle extends in a horseshoe shape 
and spreads side-to-side. A smooth muscle layer covers 
the uLM, uCM, and EUS (Fig. 3g and h) and is continuous 
with the smooth muscles of the vaginal wall. In the middle 
of the urethra, the smooth muscle layer is attached to the 
dorsal side of the bilateral expansion of the EUS.

Muscle Tissue at the Lateral Side of the Female 
Urethra

Specimens from the lateral side of the female urethra were 
collected to understand the relationship between EUS and 
LA. Of the 35 horizontal sections taken, four representa-
tive levels from proximal to distal are shown (Figs. 1 and 
4). In the upper urethra, muscle layers were arranged from 
inner to outer: uLM, uCM, skeletal muscle identified as the 
EUS, and the outermost smooth muscle layer. This layer and 
the vaginal smooth muscle layer represent distinct muscular 
structures. However, no clearly defined boundary is observed 
(Fig. 4a and b). A section 4 mm distal to the previous sec-
tion is shown in Fig. 4c and d, with muscle layers around 
the urethra arranged in the same order. The skeletal muscle 
surrounds the urethra in a horseshoe shape, lacking fibers 
posteriorly, where the uCM and outermost smooth layers 
merge (Fig. 4d, star). The section 2 mm distal to Fig. 4c is 
shown in Fig. 4e and f. In the mid-urethra, smooth muscle 
fibers extending from the vagina were found between the 
LA and EUS (Fig. 4f, *). Furthermore, these smooth mus-
cle fibers were inserted into the LA (Fig. 4f, black arrows). 
Figure 4g and h show sections 6 mm below the previous 
section. No skeletal muscle layers are observed at this level.

Fig. 3   Three-dimensional  reconstructed  images  of  the  muscular  tis-
sue  around  the  urethra.  Three-dimensional  reconstructed  images 
showing the muscles surrounding the female urethra. (a, c, e, and g) 
Anterior views. (b, d, f, and h) Posterior views. a, b The urethra was 
curved. The entire urethra was lined with uLM. c, d The entire length 
was  covered  by  the  cUM  layer.  e,  f  In  the  middle  part  of  the  ure-
thra, skeletal muscle surrounds the ventral side of the urethra, which 
extends  in  a  horseshoe  shape  and  spreads  side-to-side.  Additionally, 

in the distal part of the urethra, uLM and uCM protruded anteriorly 
(e,  dagger).  g,  h  The  smooth  muscle  layer  covers  the  uLM,  uCM, 
and EUS layers. The outermost smooth muscle layer was continuous 
with the smooth muscles of the vaginal wall. EUS, external urethral 
sphincter; sm, smooth muscle; uLM, longitudinal smooth muscle sur-
rounding urethra; uCM, circular smooth muscle surrounding urethra; 
Ur, urethra; Vm, smooth muscle from the vaginal wall

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:647–654 

651

Fig. 4   Histology  of  the  smooth  and  skeletal  muscular  tissue  of  the 
lateral  aspect  of  the  urethra.  Transverse  histological  sections  of  the 
tissue at the lateral aspect of the urethra using EVG staining (a, c, e, 
and g) and immunostaining with an anti-smooth muscle antibody (b, 
d,  f,  and  h).  a,  b  The  upper  urethra  is  arranged  in  the  order  of  the 
uLM, uCM, and skeletal muscle from the inner to the outer layer. c, 
d  A  section  4  mm  distal  to  the  previous  section.  The  skeletal  mus-
cle  surrounded  the  urethra  in  a  horseshoe  shape  and  lacked  muscle 
fibers posteriorly. Posteriorly, in the urethra, the uCM and outermost 

smooth layers continued with each other (d, star). e, f A section 2 mm 
distal to Fig. 3d. In the mid-urethra, smooth muscle fibers extending 
from the vagina were found between the LA and EUS (f *). Further-
more, these smooth muscle fibers were inserted into the LA (f, black 
arrows).  g,  h  No  skeletal  muscle  layer  is  observed  in  the  lower  ure-
thra.  EUS,  external  urethral  sphincter;  LA,  levator  ani;  sm,  smooth 
muscle;  uLM,  longitudinal  smooth  muscles  surrounding  the  urethra; 
uCM, circular smooth muscle surrounding the urethra; Ur, urethra; V, 
vagina; Vm, smooth muscle from the vaginal wall

Discussion

This study clarified the distribution of muscle tissue around 
the urethra in women and the relationship between EUS and 
LA. Our research showed that four layers of muscle surround 
the female urethra: uLM, uCM, skeletal muscle (EUS), and 
the outermost smooth muscle layer from the inner to the 
outer layer. The smooth muscle layer was contiguous with 
the smooth muscles of the vaginal wall. Smooth muscle 
fibers extending from the vaginal wall were found between 
the LA and EUS. This finding indicates that the LA muscle 
influences urinary function by interacting with the smooth 
muscle between the LA and EUS.

Previous studies have described three muscle layers sur-
rounding the female urethra: uLM, uCM, and striated muscle 
from the inner to the outer layer. The morphological charac-
teristics of each muscle layer have been previously reported. 

For example, some studies reported that the uCM is thinner 
than the uLM, and the striated sphincter layer encircles the 
urethra, with the thickest muscle layer in the middle [4, 5]. 
However, its extension into the surrounding muscle layers 
has not been reported in detail. Our findings revealed four 
rather than three layers of muscle surrounding the female 
urethra. In addition to the three layers discussed in previous 
studies, there is an outermost smooth muscle layer. Previous 
studies have mainly focused on the sphincteric action of the 
internal urethral sphincter and EUS in relation to urethral 
control and contraction in women [5, 21]. Consequently, 
the EUS in women is widely regarded as a key component 
in controlling urethral contraction and managing urinary 
incontinence [22, 23]. Our study highlights the presence of 
the outermost smooth muscle layer and its connective role 
within the skeletal muscle groups of the female urethra and 
its essential role in urinary control.

652 

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:647–654

This study showed that the urethra is surrounded by the 
outermost smooth muscle layer, which is contiguous with 
the smooth muscle of the vaginal wall. This smooth muscle 
is not only attached to the LA muscle, as reported by Kato 
et al. [4], but is also connected to the EUS. The smooth 
muscle may likely be involved in elevating the LA, thereby 
influencing the action of the EUS. When the LA contracts, 
it pulls this smooth muscle upward and forward, which sub-
sequently supports the posterior and inferior aspects of the 
urethra. It is hypothesized that urethral fixation by smooth 
muscles enhances the contractile force of the EUS. The 
horseshoe-shaped structure of the EUS, which surrounds 
the anterior and lateral sides of the urethra, is believed to 
support this function.

Moreover, this smooth muscle layer protruded anterolat-
erally and extended its muscle fibers toward the pubic bone. 
In the proximal part of the female urethra, the smooth mus-
cle extending toward the pubic bone is a part of the pubo-
urethral ligament [4]. This structure further supports the idea 
that smooth muscles pull the urethra upward and forward, 
thereby stabilizing it and aiding the EUS in urethral closure. 
The anterior curvature of the distal urethra in some speci-
mens may reflect this elevating action of the smooth muscle 
(Fig. 3a and b). In male individuals, the EUS is continuous 
with the external anal sphincter (EAS) and LA; therefore, 
the supportive action of the EAS and LA in EUS contrac-
tions is thought to contribute to its urinary function. In addi-
tion, smooth muscle tissue is present on the dorsal side of 
the urethra in male individuals and is believed to facilitate 
the contractile function of EUS [16]. However, in female 
individuals, EUS is not directly continuous with the LA or 
EAS; therefore, urinary function may depend significantly 
on the balance of the entire pelvic floor, particularly on ure-
thral fixation by the smooth muscle. The uLM and uCM do 
not form a simple ring around the urethra; instead, these 
layers extend anteriorly, separating the skeletal muscle layer, 
which forms a horseshoe shape around the urethra without 
muscle fibers posteriorly and extends ventrally in a horse-
shoe shape, spreading side to side.

The relationship between urethral muscles and LA is still 
debated. In men, a study has shown continuity between the 
skeletal muscles of the EUS, LA, EAS, and bulbospongio-
sus. That study also revealed that the smooth muscles of the 
rectum fit into the spaces created by these muscles [15]. For 
women, some studies indicated that the LA may not actively 
participate in urethral control because it does not encircle the 
ventral side of the urethra [10]. In contrast, others reported 
that proper LA function is necessary for EUS function since 
the lower portion of the female EUS is connected to the 
puborectal portion of the LA by tendons [11]. A previous 
study by our research group on female urethra showed that 
vaginal smooth muscle fibers covered the urethra. We found 
that the LA and smooth muscle fibers were in direct contact 

and that the LA may have an impact on the function of the 
female urethra [4]. In addition, our current study clarified 
that smooth muscle fibers extend from the vagina between 
the LA and EUS in female individuals. Smooth muscle fib-
ers were in direct contact with the LA and EUS, mediating 
the relationship between them. Thus, the LA may affect the 
function of the female urethra even without a direct connec-
tion to the urethral sphincter.

Understanding the distribution of the muscles around the 
urethra in women is clinically significant. To date, attention 
has primarily been focused on the urethral sphincter mus-
cles when considering urinary control. However, our find-
ings suggest that urinary function depends on the urethral 
sphincter and the balance with surrounding structures. The 
pelvic floor is susceptible to aging, and its structure descends 
with age [24, 25]. Under such conditions, it is necessary to 
consider both the urethral structure and function and the 
balance of the pelvic floor.

In addition to the sphincter effect, the striated urethral 
sphincter acts as a support structure to maintain stability 
and urinary continence [26]. The inner smooth muscle sur-
rounding the urethra is thought to enhance the EUS force 
[25]. In particular, uLM contraction can shorten urethral 
length, lower closure pressure, and strengthen the sphinc-
ter mechanism, which is essential for initiating urination [5, 
27]. This study revealed that the arrangement of the muscle 
layers differs depending on the urethral height, which may 
result in different effects on urination. The discovery that the 
urethra is not uniform and that its functional roles may vary 
depending on its height is crucial.

This study had some limitations. First, the cadaver donors 
were older adults with an average age of over 78 years, 
which could mean the weaker muscles in the aging female 
urethra may influence the muscle distribution. Second, the 
information on BMI, medical history, specifically obstet-
ric history, vaginal deliveries, and history of pelvic/vaginal 
surgeries (prolapse/incontinence) of the cadavers was not 
possible because such information was not collected during 
the body donation process.

Conclusions

This  study  revealed  four  muscle  layers  surrounding  the 
female urethra and showed that the EUS is connected to the 
LA through the outermost smooth muscle layer. Therefore, 
increased LA activity can affect the urethra via this smooth 
muscle. Consequently, urination control involves not only 
the sphincteric action of the EUS but also the balance of the 
pelvic floor muscles.

Acknowledgements  The authors sincerely thank the body donors who 
contributed to this anatomical research. Our results can potentially 

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:647–654 

653

enhance human knowledge and improve patient care. Therefore, we 
are deeply grateful to the donors and their families.

Author’s Contributions  T.L. contributed to the conception and design of 
the study; acquisition, analysis, and interpretation of data; drafting of the 
manuscript; and final approval of the version to be published. S.T. con-
tributed to the analysis and data collection. S.M. and K.A. contributed 
to the conception and design of the study, data interpretation, critical 
revision of the draft, and approval of the final version of the manuscript.

Funding  Open access funding provided by Institute of Science Tokyo.

Data Availability  Data supporting this study’s findings are available 
from the corresponding author on a reasonable request.

Declarations 

Ethical Approval  The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University (approval number: M2018-006).

Conflict of Interest  None.

Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.

References

  1.  Blomquist JL, Muñoz A, Handa VL, et al. Pelvic floor muscle 
strength and the incidence of pelvic floor disorders after vaginal 
and cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2020;222(1):62.e1-62.
e8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ajog. 2019. 08. 003

  2.  Standring S. Gray’s anatomy: the anatomical basis of clinical prac-

tice. 41st ed. New York: Elsevier; 2016. p. 1232–3.

  3.  Ashton-Miller JA, DeLancey JO. Functional anatomy of the female 
pelvic floor. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007;1101:266–96. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1196/ annals. 1389. 034

  4.  Kato MK, Sato F, Okuda T, et al. Spatial distribution of smooth mus-
cle tissue in the female pelvic floor and surrounding the urethra and 
vagina. Anat Sci Int. 2020;95(4):516–22. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s12565- 020- 00549-9

  5.  Mistry MA, Sekar M, Dalziel K, et al. A structured review on the 
female urethral anatomy and innervation with an emphasis on the 
role of the urethral longitudinal smooth muscle. Int Urogynecol J. 
2020;31(1):63–71. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00192- 019- 04104-7
  6.  Colleselli K, Mayr J, Schaer G, et al. The female urethral sphincter: a 
morphological and topographical study. J Urol. 1998;160(1):49–54. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s0022- 5347(01) 63025-8

  7.  Strasser  H,  Nitti  V,  Klima  G,  et  al.  Anatomic  and  functional 
studies of the male and female urethral sphincter. World J Urol. 
2000;18(5):324–9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s0034 50000 145

  8.  Karam I, Tubbs RS, Loukas M, et al. Innervation of the female 
human urethral sphincter: 3D reconstruction of immunohistochemi-
cal studies in the fetus. Eur Urol. 2005;47(5):627–33; discussion 
634. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. eururo. 2005. 01. 001

  9.  Kokoua A, Hadji HS, Bouchet G, et al. Maturation of the external 
urinary sphincter: a comparative histotopographic study in humans. 
J Urol. 1993;150(2 Pt. 2):617–22. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s0022- 
5347(17) 35563-5

 10.  Yucel S, Baskin LS. An anatomical description of the male and 
female urethral sphincter complex. J Urol. 2004;171(5):1890–7. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ 01. ju. 00001 24106. 16505. df

 11.  Wallner C, Dabhoiwala NF, DeRuiter MC, et al. The anatomical 
components of urinary continence. Eur Urol. 2009;55(4):932–43. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. eururo. 2008. 08. 032

 12.  Muro S, Moue S, Nishiyama M, et al. The series of smooth mus-
cle structures in the pelvic floors of men: dynamic coordination of 
smooth and skeletal muscles. Clin Anat. 2021;34(2):272–82. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1002/ ca. 23713

 13.  Muro S, Akita K. Pelvic floor and perineal muscles: a dynamic 
coordination between skeletal and smooth muscles on pelvic floor 
stabilization. Anat Sci Int. 2023;98(3):407–25. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1007/ s12565- 023- 00717-7

 14.  Muro S, Moue S, Akita K. Twisted orientation of the muscle bundles 
in the levator ani functional parts in women: implications for pelvic 
floor support mechanism. J Anat. 2024;244(3):486–96. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1111/ joa. 13968

 15.  Muro S, Suriyut J, Akita K. Anatomy of Cowper’s gland in humans 
suggesting a secretion and emission mechanism facilitated by coop-
eration of striated and smooth muscles. Sci Rep. 2021;11(1):16705. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41598- 021- 96130-z

 16.  Muro S, Fujiwara K, Naito Y, et al. Anatomy of muscle connections 
in the male urethra and anorectal canal. BJU Int. 2024;133(6):752–9. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ bju. 16307

 17.  Muro S, Akita K. Novel combination method of wide-range serial 
sectioning and 3D reconstruction visualizing both macro-level 
dynamics and micro-level interactions in an attempt to analyze the 
female pelvic floor. Anat Sci Int. 2023;98(3):343–52. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1007/ s12565- 023- 00710-0

 18.  Muro S, Moue S, Nishiyama M, et al. Spatial distribution of smooth 
muscle tissue in the male pelvic floor with special reference to the 
lateral extent of the rectourethralis muscle: application to prostatec-
tomy and proctectomy. Clin Anat. 2018;31(8):1167–76. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1002/ ca. 23254

 19.  Muro S, Hachiya R, Kimura K, et al. Anatomy of the smooth mus-
cle structure in the female anorectal anterior wall: convergence and 
anterior extension of the internal anal sphincter and longitudinal 
muscle. Colorectal Dis. 2019;21(4):472–80. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 
codi. 14549

 20.  Muro S, Shintaku Y, Kimura K, et al. Coexistence of dense and sparse 
areas in the longitudinal smooth muscle of the anal canal: anatomical 
and histological analyses inspired by magnetic resonance images. Clin 
Anat. 2020;33(4):619–26. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ ca. 23467

 21.  Watanabe H, Takahashi S, Ukimura O. Urethra actively opens from 
the very beginning of micturition: a new concept of urethral function. 
Int J Urol. 2014;21(2):208–11. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ iju. 12212
 22.  Jung J, Ahn HK, Huh Y. Clinical and functional anatomy of the 
urethral sphincter. Int Neurourol J. 2012;16(3):102–6. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 5213/ inj. 2012. 16.3. 102

 23.  Oelrich TM. The striated urogenital sphincter muscle in the female. 
Anat Rec. 1983;205(2):223–32. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ ar. 10920 50213
 24.  Chaudhry Z, Tarnay C. Descending perineum syndrome: a review 
of the presentation, diagnosis, and management. Int Urogynecol J. 
2016;27(8):1149–56. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00192- 015- 2889-0

 25.  Petros P. Bladder/urethral smooth muscle contraction is adjunctive to 
external striated muscle forces. Int Urogynecol J. 2020;31(4):851–2. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00192- 020- 04276-7

 26.  Li JR, Zeng K, Zhang Y, et al. Architecture of female urethral sup-
porting structures based on undeformed high-resolution sectional 
anatomical images. Anat Sci Int. 2021;96(1):30–41. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1007/ s12565- 020- 00554-y

654 

International Urogynecology Journal (2025) 36:647–654

 27.  Attari A, DeLancey JO, Ashton-Miller JA. On structure-function 
relationships in the female human urethra: a finite element model 
approach. Ann Biomed Eng. 2021;49(8):1848–60. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1007/ s10439- 021- 02765-4

Publisher’s  Note  Springer  Nature  remains  neutral  with  regard  to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
