---
pmid: 39833535
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/39833535
title: Value of endometrial biopsy in patients with hysteroscopically atrophic endometrium in patients with postmenopausal bleeding.
---

Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics (2025) 311:1127–1132 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00404-024-07922-3

GYNECOLOGIC ONCOLOGY

Value of endometrial biopsy in patients with hysteroscopically 
atrophic endometrium in patients with postmenopausal bleeding

Ayisha A. Ashmore1 
Viren Asher1 · Anish Bali1 · Shilpa Kolhe1 · Andrew Phillips1

 · Abayomi I. Alao1 · Amie Hibbard1 · Libbi Burchnall2 · Natalie Menic1 · Summi Abdul1 · 

Received: 3 July 2024 / Accepted: 26 December 2024 / Published online: 20 January 2025 
© Crown 2025

Abstract
Purpose  To determine the rate of precancer and cancer in women presenting with PMB who have a visually atrophic endome-
trium at hysteroscopy and assess the value of endometrial biopsy in this situation and the adequacy of the samples obtained.
Methods  Retrospective reviews of all patients with a visually atrophic endometrium at hysteroscopy who had presented with 
PMB and had an ET > / = 4 mm or ET < 4 mm with focal changes or irregular features between 2013 and 2024 at University 
Hospitals of Derby and Burton were included (n = 1096). Patients who had previously had cancer or precancer or had unclear 
hysteroscopy findings were excluded. The endometrial biopsy histology result was considered the main outcome measure.
Results  188 patients did not have a biopsy performed (17.15%), 660 patients had benign pathology (60.22%), and 239 
patients had an inadequate sample result (21.81%). Nine patients had precancerous changes (0.82%). The rate of cancer 
was 0.00% (n = 0). The NPV of a visually atrophic endometrial cavity at hysteroscopy in detecting precancer or cancer was 
99.2%. Patients with an ET < 4 mm pre-hysteroscopy and an atrophic endometrial cavity at hysteroscopy were 2.25 times 
more likely than those whose ET is > 4 mm to have an inadequate sample (p < 0.001, 95% CI 1.61–3.16). 10 patients who 
had an inadequate sample at initial biopsy had a repeat inadequate sample (n = 23, 43.48%).
Conclusions  The incidence of precancer/cancer in patients presenting with PMB with a visually atrophic endometrium at 
hysteroscopy is low. Many patients within this cohort have an inadequate sample at biopsy, and therefore, repeat sampling 
is of questionable value.

Keywords  Endometrial cancer · Atrophic endometrium · Hysteroscopy

What does this study add to the clinical work 

There  were  no  instances  of  cancer  in  patients  with 
an  hysteroscopically  atrophic  endometrium.  This 
study  provides  evidence  to  support  clinicians  in 
not  performing  a  biopsy  within  the  context  of  a 
hysteroscopically atrophic endometrium as all other 
evidence pertains to ultrasound findings.

 *  Ayisha A. Ashmore 

ayisha.ashmore1@nhs.net

1  Derby Gynaecological Cancer Centre, Department 

of Gynaecology, University Hospitals of Derby and Burton 
NHS Foundation Trust (UHDB), Royal Derby Hospital, 
Uttoxeter Road, Derby DE22 3NE, UK
2  University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK

Introduction

Post-menopausal bleeding (PMB) is the most common pres-
entation of endometrial cancer [1]. In the United Kingdom 
(UK), women with PMB are initially referred for a trans-
vaginal ultrasound to assess the thickness of endometrium. 
Those with an endometrial thickness (ET) of < 4 mm with 
an absence of irregular features are unlikely to have cancer 
or precancer and can therefore be reassured [1]. In women 
with an ET of > / = 4 mm or containing irregular features, 
an endometrial biopsy is required for further investigation 
of potential malignant change [1]. Most patients are offered 
an outpatient Pipelle® biopsy, but for many, this may not be 
feasible or inappropriate given irregular ultrasound features 
or significant risk factors for cancer [1]. In such cases, hyst-
eroscopy is recommended to visualise the endometrial cavity 
and obtain a biopsy [1].

The accuracy of hysteroscopy in diagnosing endometrial 
cancer and hyperplasia has been reported to be variable. 

Vol.:(0123456789) 
1128

Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics (2025) 311:1127–1132

In a systematic review of data in 26,346 women, a positive 
hysteroscopy result increased the probability of cancer by 
67.9% but a negative result only reduced the probability of 
cancer by 3.3% [2].

Therefore, a biopsy is particularly important in those with 
a negative hysteroscopy result to exclude malignant changes. 
However, obtaining an adequate endometrial biopsy relies on 
operator experience and can be challenging when the endo-
metrial thickness is low [3]. This difficulty is further com-
pounded when the endometrial cavity is atrophic on visual 
inspection and many samples are reported as inadequate. 
There is no consensus on the value of an endometrial biopsy 
in the context of a clinically atrophic uterus, and indeed, 
many samples taken in this context are inadequate. Further, 
when a sample is reported as inadequate, there is uncertainty 
as to whether a repeat biopsy is required.

Aim/theory

This  study  aims  to  determine  the  rate  of  precancerous 
changes  such  as  endometrial  hyperplasia  and  cancer  in 
women presenting with PMB who have a visually atrophic 
endometrium at hysteroscopy and assess the value of endo-
metrial biopsy in this situation and the adequacy of the sam-
ples obtained.

Method

The study was registered and approved as a retrospective 
study with the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 
at University Hospitals of Derby and Burton (UHDB) in 
accordance  with  the  hospital  research  and  development 
guidance. All patient data were obtained with permission 
from the UHDB Caldicott Guardian, ensuring patient con-
fidentiality and compliance with data protection regulations. 
Patients were identified from the prospectively recorded hos-
pital outpatient hysteroscopy databases.

We performed a retrospective review of all patients who 
had been referred for hysteroscopy due to postmenopausal 
bleeding and were reported to have an atrophic endometrial 
cavity between 2013 and 2023. This included both outpa-
tient  and  inpatient  hysteroscopy  patients.  All  histologi-
cal specimens were assessed by specialist gynaecological 
histopathologists.

All women were offered treatment in line with the UK 
guidance  and  followed  up  in  accordance  with  accepted 
national and local guideline algorithms [1, 4]. Inclusion 
criteria were: women with PMB with an ET > / = 4 mm or 
ET < 4 mm with focal changes or irregular features. Exclu-
sion criteria were: previous cancer or precancerous changes 

under histological follow-up and poor views at hysteroscopy 
resulting in inability to make an adequate assessment.

Statistical  analyses  were  performed  using  SPSS  26. 
Incidence of precancer and cancer were the primary out-
come variables. χ2 was performed to test for differences 
between histology outcome and both operator grade and 
type of biopsy performed. Binomial logistic regression was 
performed to determine whether there was an association 
between pre-hysteroscopy endometrial thickness and inci-
dence of an inadequate biopsy sample in patients with a 
visually atrophic endometrium on hysteroscopy.

Results

A total of 1096 patients were identified between 2013 and 
2023. The median age of patients was 57 years and the mean 
BMI was 29.5 kg/m2. The median ET in all patients was 
5.0 mm.

Histology

One hundred and eighty-eight patients did not have a biopsy 
performed due to clinical findings of an atrophic uterus 
(17.1%). 660 patients had a benign pathology (60.22%) on 
histological examination of their biopsy, but 239 patients had 
an inadequate sample result (21.81%). Of those that had a 
biopsy, two patients had endometrial hyperplasia (EH) with 
atypia and seven patients had EH without atypia. The rate 
of cancer within the dataset was 0.00% (n = 0). The rate of 
precancer was 0.82% (n = 9). See Table 1. Of those that did 
not have a biopsy or had an inadequate sample, none went 
on to have cancer or precancer. The negative predictive value 
of a visually atrophic endometrial cavity at hysteroscopy in 
detecting precancer or cancer was 99.01%.

Risk factors

Precancer rate was sub-analyzed by risk factors including 
Body Mass Index (BMI), Hormone Replacement Therapy 
(HRT), diabetes, nulliparity, and use of tamoxifen (see 
Table 2). The highest rate of precancer was seen in the 
nulliparous cohort with 2.20% of patients having precancer 
(n = 2). In patients with BMI of over 30 kg/m2, the pre-
cancer rate was 1.35%. The precancer rate in BMI class 
1 was 0.07% (n = 1, total 135), BMI class 2 was 0.00% 
(n = 0, total = 76), and BMI class 3 was 3.53% (n = 3, total 
85). In those with a normal-overweight BMI category, the 
precancer rate was 0.63% (n = 5, total = 800).

 
Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics (2025) 311:1127–1132 

1129

Table 1   Histology results from endometrial biopsy

Table 3   Precancer rate by ultrasound feature

Histology

Total (n) Rate (%)

Type of complex feature

Total (n)

Atrophic or inactive endometrium
Benign polyp
Chronic inflammation/endometritis
EH with atypia
EH without atypia
Secretory endometrium (progesterone effect)
Proliferative endometrium
Other benign
Inadequate sample
No biopsy performed
Grand total

349
98
12
2
7
20
143
37
239
189
1096

31.84
8.95
1.09
0.18
0.64
1.82
13.05
3.38
21.81
17.24
100.00

Complex features on ultrasound

544  patients  had  complex  features  on  ultrasound  scan 
including a heterogeneous endometrium, intracavity fluid, 
an irregular endometrial–myometrial junction, or a sus-
pected focal lesion, see Table 3.

Inadequate samples

907 patients (82.76%) of patient had a biopsy performed. 
239 patients (21.8%) were reported to have had an inad-
equate sample on histological examination.

In patients who had a biopsy performed, 756 patients 
(68.98%) had a Pipelle® biopsy only, 63 patients (5.75%) 
had a directed biopsy only, and 62 patients (5.66%) had 
both a Pipelle® and directed biopsy. 16 patients (1.46%) 
had endometrial curettings (Table 4). The rest of the patients 
did not have a biopsy, or their mode of biopsy was unknown 
(18.15%). In patients who had a Pipelle® biopsy, 28.4% 
(n = 215) had an inadequate sample result. In patients who 
had a directed biopsy, 15.87% (n = 10) had an inadequate 
sample result. χ2 testing found a statistically significant 
difference in the number of inadequate histology results 
returned between Pipelle® sampling and direct sampling 
modalities (p = 0.03).

Table 2   Precancer rate by risk factor

Risk factor

Total (n)

Total precancer 
(n)

Rate of 
precancer 
(%)

BMI > 30
HRT
Diabetes
Nulliparity
Tamoxifen

296
104
55
91
39

4
0
0
2
2

1.35
0.00
0.00
2.20
5.13

Heterogeneous endometrium 179
Intracavity fluid
Irregular endometrial–
myometrial junction
Suspected focal lesion
No complex features
Grand total

232
552
1096

98
35

Total 
precancer 
(n)

Rate of 
precancer 
(%)

1
0
0

3
5
9

0.56
0.00
0.00

1.29
0.91
0.82

772 patients out of 907 patients (85.12%) had a biopsy 
performed by either a consultant or advanced nurse prac-
titioner. 135 patients (14.88%) had biopsies performed by 
a  registrar  or  the  operator  grade  was  unknown. χ2  test-
ing did not find a statistically significant difference in the 
number of inadequate histology results returned between 
operator grades of advanced nurse practitioner or consult-
ant (p = 0.98).

Twenty-three patients who had an inadequate sample at 
initial biopsy had a repeat biopsy performed. Ten of these 
samples were again reported as inadequate (43.48%). The 
remaining repeat samples showed benign pathology only.

When the pre-hysteroscopy ET was < 4 mm (but had focal 
changes or irregular features), the rate of inadequate sam-
ples was higher at 26.99% (n = 78, total ET < 4 mm = 289). 
A binomial logistic regression was performed to ascertain 
the association between a pre-hysteroscopy ET of > / = 4 mm 
and the likelihood that patients have an inadequate sam-
ple.  The  logistic  regression  model  was  statistically  sig-
nificant in our population of patients who were found to 
have an atrophic endometrial cavity on hysteroscopy χ2(df 
1) = 21.41, p < 0.001. The model explained 3.7% (Nagel-
kerke  R2) of the variance in inadequate samples and cor-
rectly classified 74.2% of cases. The model predicted the 
odds of an inadequate sample in patients with an ET < 4 mm 
pre-hysteroscopy and found to have an atrophic endometrial 
cavity at hysteroscopy is 2.25 times more than those whose 
ET is > 4 mm. This was statistically significant (p < 0.001, 
95% CI 1.61–3.16).

Discussion

Main findings

We present the largest study of patients undergoing hyst-
eroscopy with clinically atrophic findings. In this context, 
patients and clinicians can be assured that the rate of cancer 
can be effectively excluded on hysteroscopic findings alone 

1130

Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics (2025) 311:1127–1132

Table 4   Type of biopsy

Type of sample

Type of biopsy (n)

Directed

Pipelle®

Directed and 
Pipelle®

Curettings

Unknown

Total

Adequate sample
Inadequate sample
Grand total

53
10
63

541
215
756

54
8
62

12
4
16

8
2
10

668
239
907

and the rate of precancer in these patients is extremely low. 
In our dataset, there were no occurrences of endometrial 
cancer in patients who presented with PMB and had an 
atrophic endometrium of hysteroscopy. We also found that 
the incidence of precancer was very low in this cohort of 
patients (0.82%, n = 9).

One  of  the  problems  with  performing  biopsies  in 
patients with atrophic endometrial cavities at hysteros-
copy is that success is dependent on operator experience. 
Often samples will be reported as ‘inadequate’, and it is 
therefore challenging to plan further management. Our 
study found that there was a higher proportion of patients 
with an inadequate sample when a Pipelle® biopsy tech-
nique was used in comparison with a directed biopsy tech-
nique using 5Fr hysteroscopic grasper (p < 0.05). How -
ever, there was no significant difference between number 
of inadequate samples when the operator was a consultant 
or an advanced nurse practitioner (p > 0.05). Of those that 
had an initial inadequate sample result, almost half had 
a repeat inadequate sample. No instances of precancer 
or cancer were found in repeat biopsy samples. We also 
found that patients with a pre-hysteroscopy ET of < 4 mm 
were 2.25 times more likely to have an inadequate sample 
at biopsy than those with an ET > / = 4 mm when the hys-
teroscopic finding was of an atrophic endometrial cavity. 
As such, we suggest that in the atrophic endometrium 
with satisfactory view, biopsies are of limited value and 
certainly a repeat biopsy due to inadequate pathology is 
of no value.

Strengths and limitations

Our study has the largest cohort of patients with PMB and a 
visually atrophic endometrial cavity at hysteroscopy. How-
ever, it suffers from the usual limitations of a retrospective 
single center review which makes it susceptible to bias. 
We therefore propose a larger study in the context of a ran-
domised control trial to fully assess the value of endometrial 
biopsy in the context of an atrophic endometrial cavity at 
hysteroscopy with no other abnormal endometrial features 
on ultrasound.

Interpretation

There is no UK guidance on management of patients with 
an inadequate biopsy sample at hysteroscopy. Our study, 
however, suggests that an inadequate biopsy in the context 
of a clinical atrophic uterus is reassuring to the patient, and 
as such, they should be discharged without repeat sampling. 
Indeed, this is supported by a meta-analysis evidencing high 
sensitivity of hysteroscopic impression in diagnosing EC 
(82.6%, specificity 99.7%) [5]. However, in the context of 
recurrent PMB, this situation is more challenging with the 
British Gynaecological Cancer Society recommending hys-
teroscopy and endometrial biopsy in patients where there 
is recurrent PMB and by extension also recommending a 
hysterectomy in patients where there is unexplained recur-
rent PMB [1]. While our data support the safety of finding 
an atrophic endometrium at hysteroscopy, in the context of 
recurrent unexplained bleeding further studies are required 
to investigate the value of such findings.

One UK study of 97 patients presenting with PMB found 
that successfully obtaining a Pipelle® sample could avoid 
the need for a hysteroscopy altogether in 61.5% of cases 
[3]. They reported no cases of missed endometrial cancer 
when a Pipelle® biopsy was successfully obtained. How-
ever,  the  authors  also  reported  that  success  of  Pipelle® 
biopsy is dependent on the ET. The study found the prob-
ability of obtaining an adequate sample in patients with an 
ET of < 5 mm was only 27%. The authors therefore recom-
mended that an endometrial biopsy should only be per-
formed when the ET is > 4 mm as there is little value and 
success in garnering a sample when the ET is less than this.
Similarly, a study of 166 postmenopausal patients in Italy 
found that patients with an ET < 7 mm were more likely to 
have an atrophic endometrium at histology [6]. The authors, 
therefore, concluded that hysteroscopy and biopsy diagnostic 
testing should be used with caution and consideration.

However, a prospective study of 913 Dutch women pre-
senting  with  PMB  had  alternative  conclusions  [7].  The 
authors found that 66 out of 913 patients had insufficient 
tissue obtained from office endometrial biopsy. Of these 
women, repeat sampling revealed 3 endometrial cancer and 
1 endometrial hyperplasia. The study concluded that a non-
diagnostic endometrial sample does not exclude cancer, and 
thus, further endometrial sampling is advised.

 
Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics (2025) 311:1127–1132 

1131

Endometrial biopsy technique can also be considered 
when trying to obtain an adequate sample. There is evidence 
that similar problems with obtaining adequate samples exist 
with the other forms of blind pipette-type biopsies. One 
study reported an inadequate rate of 27% with the MedGyn® 
pipette [8]. Direct sampling techniques seem to have more 
success and a further study found a more accurate diagnosis 
of EC histology using a hysteroscopic guided ‘grasp’ biopsy 
compared with a blind Novak curette [9]. These findings are 
supported by a recent review of evidence of recommenda-
tions which have demonstrated the superiority of directed 
biopsy techniques such as ‘chip’ or ‘pick-up’ biopsies in 
women with atrophic endometrial cavities in obtaining an 
adequate sample [10, 11]. Interestingly, when comparing 
final histological diagnosis following surgery to the initial 
endometrial biopsy, both volume of tissue and accuracy of 
sampling seem to be important. A meta-analysis of 12,459 
patients showed that there was higher agreement between 
hysteroscopic biopsy and final diagnosis compared with 
dilatation and curettage despite dilatation and curettage 
producing a higher volume of tissue (p = 0.02) [12]. Essen-
tially, a larger biopsy and directed biopsies are much more 
likely to be adequate and generate an accurate histological 
diagnosis [13].

Patients’ expectations and perceptions of care are equally 
important when there is uncertainty surrounding manage-
ment. Hysteroscopies and/or biopsies can be uncomfortable 
and outpatient procedures in particular have been associated 
with significant pain, anxiety, and embarrassment [14–17]. 
However, there are also reports that women with PMB are 
strongly risk averse and would prefer to have investigations 
to avoid missing an endometrial cancer, even if the risk of 
missing this diagnosis was low (0.4%) [18]. Thus, we sug-
gest that if a biopsy is being considered in the context of an 
atrophic endometrium, a directed biopsy is taken instead of 
a blind Pipelle® biopsy.

Our findings have significant resource implications for 
the NHS. The cost per endometrial biopsy is £98 based 
on NHS tariffs [2, 19]. In our cohort alone, the cost of all 
biopsies performed was £88,886 where the vast major-
ity of samples were benign. Further, £23,442 could have 
been  saved  from  potentially  unnecessary  biopsies  that 
were reported as inadequate. Additionally, there are wider 
implications on cancer waiting list times and faster diag-
nostics  standards.  Processing  time  for  any  biopsy  will 
extend the time that patients remain on a cancer pathway 
which may not confer any benefit according to the results 
of our study.

Our study highlighted that the highest rate of precancer 
in patients with a hysteroscopically atrophic endometrium 
was in those taking tamoxifen (n = 2 out of 39, 5.13%). 
Although these numbers are small, they represent a high-
risk group and careful consideration regarding the need for 

biopsy should be given to this cohort of patients. In fact, 
in patients taking tamoxifen, there is a plausible risk of 
EC in both pre-menopausal and postmenopausal women 
who may have a thickened endometrium with or without 
PMB [20, 21]. The risk of EC can be predicted using vari-
ous parameters of which hysteroscopic findings are chief 
among them, and so, further investigation is required to 
assess whether our results are generalisable [21].

Finally, we must stress that our results are only appli-
cable to those patients which meet our inclusion criteria. 
In our initial data collection, two cancers were identified. 
On further examination of the patients’ records, the first 
patient was under routine follow-up for atypical endome-
trial hyperplasia and the second had poor views of the 
cavity due to blood and no ostia were seen. These patients 
were thereby excluded from our study.

In conclusion, our study found no evidence of endome-
trial cancer in patients with a visually atrophic endome-
trial cavity on hysteroscopy. A directed endometrial biopsy 
using hysteroscopic 5Fr grasper is considered superior to 
blind Pipelle® biopsy to obtain histological confirmation 
of benign endometrium. We also found that one-fifth of 
patients had an inadequate sample at biopsy and almost 
half of repeat samples were also inadequate. We believe 
that given the lack of evidence governing the management 
of patients with inadequate samples, further evidence is 
required to support repeat invasive diagnostic testing. We 
believe that currently our results support a more conserva-
tive approach, but any change in policy must be guided by 
high-quality randomized evidence.

Author contributions  AAA: data collection and management, data 
analysis, and manuscript writing. AIA: data collection and manage-
ment, and manuscript writing. AH: data collection and management, 
and manuscript writing. LB: data collection and management, and 
manuscript writing. NM: data collection and management, and manu-
script writing. SA: project development, supervision, and manuscript 
editing. VA: project development, supervision, and manuscript editing. 
AB: project development, supervision, and manuscript editing. SK: 
project development, supervision, and manuscript editing. AP: project 
development, supervision, and manuscript editing.

Funding  The authors declare that no funds, grants, or other supports 
were received during the preparation of this manuscript.

Data availability  Anonymised data can be provided on request.

Declarations 

Conflict of interest  None of the authors have any competing interests.

Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 

1132

Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics (2025) 311:1127–1132

included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References

  1.  Morrison J, Balega J, Buckley L et al (2022) British gynaecologi-
cal cancer society (BGCS) uterine cancer guidelines: recommen-
dations for practice. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 270:50–89. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ejogrb. 2021. 11. 423

  2.  Clark TJ, Mann CH, Shah N, Khan KS, Song F, Gupta JK. Accu-
racy of outpatient endometrial biopsy in the diagnosis of endo-
metrial cancer: a systematic quantitative review. In: Database 
of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE): Quality-Assessed 
Reviews [Internet]. Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (UK); 
2002. https:// www. ncbi. nlm. nih. gov/ books/ NBK69 498/. Accessed 
3 Feb 2024

  3.  Elsandabesee D, Greenwood P (2005) The performance of Pipelle 
endometrial sampling in a dedicated postmenopausal bleeding 
clinic. J Obstet Gynaecol 25(1):32–34. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 
01443 61040 00253 90

  4.  Management of Endometrial Hyperplasia (Green-top Guideline 
No. 67). RCOG. https:// www. rcog. org. uk/ guida nce/ browse- all-  
guida nce/ green- top- guide lines/ manag ement- of- endom etrial- hyper 
plasia- green- top- guide line- no- 67/. Accessed 20 Feb 2024
  5.  Gkrozou F, Dimakopoulos G, Vrekoussis T et al (2015) Hysteros-
copy in women with abnormal uterine bleeding: a meta-analysis 
on four major endometrial pathologies. Arch Gynecol Obstet 
291(6):1347–1354. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00404- 014- 3585-x

  6.  Giannella L, DelliCarpini G, Di Giuseppe J et al (2020) Atrophic 
endometrium in postmenopausal women referred to diagnostic 
hysteroscopy: a study to avoid unnecessary examinations. Eur Rev 
Med Pharmacol Sci 24(10):5217–5222. https:// doi. org/ 10. 26355/ 
eurrev_ 202005_ 21303

  7.  van Doorn HC, Opmeer BC, Burger CW et al (2007) Inadequate 
office endometrial sample requires further evaluation in women 
with postmenopausal bleeding and abnormal ultrasound results. 
Int J Gynecol Obstet. 99(2):100–104. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j.  
ijgo. 2007. 05. 040

  8.  Dorji N, Dorjey Y, Tshering S, Pradhan B, Chhetri M, Bhujel 
D (2024) Rate and risk factors of inadequate endometrial tis-
sues after endometrial sampling among Bhutanese women at 
the national referral hospital of Bhutan: a cross-sectional study. 
BMC  Womens  Health  24(1):214.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/  
s12905- 024- 03047-6

  9.  Di Spiezio SA, Saccone G, Carugno J et al (2022) Endometrial 
biopsy under direct hysteroscopic visualisation versus blind endo-
metrial sampling for the diagnosis of endometrial hyperplasia and 
cancer: systematic review and meta-analysis. Facts Views Vis 
Obgyn. 14(2):103–110. https:// doi. org/ 10. 52054/ FVVO. 14.2. 023
 10  Vitale SG, Buzzaccarini G, Riemma G et al (2023) Endome-
trial biopsy: Indications, techniques and recommendations an 

evidence-based guideline for clinical practice. J Gynecol Obstet 
Hum Reprod. 52(6):102588. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jogoh. 2023. 
102588

 11  Vitale SG, Riemma G, Alonso Pacheco L et al (2021) Hystero-
scopic endometrial biopsy: from indications to instrumentation 
and  techniques  a  call  to  action.  Minim  Invasive  Ther  Allied 
Technol. 30(5):251–262. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 13645 706. 2021. 
19608 62

 12.  Visser NCM, Reijnen C, Massuger LFAG, Nagtegaal ID, Bulten 
J, Pijnenborg JMA (2017) Accuracy of endometrial sampling in 
endometrial carcinoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Obstet Gynecol 130(4):803–813. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ AOG.  
00000 00000 002261

 13.  Giampaolino P, Della Corte L, Di Filippo C, Mercorio A, Vitale 
SG, Bifulco G (2020) Office hysteroscopy in the management of 
women with postmenopausal bleeding. Climacteric 23(4):369–
375. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 13697 137. 2020. 17543 89

 14.  Jivraj S, Dass M, Panikkar J, Brown V (2004) Outpatient hyster-
oscopy: an observational study of patient acceptability. Medicina 
(Kaunas) 40(12):1207–1210

 15.  Morgan M, Dodds W, Wolfe C, Raju S (2004) Women’s views 
and experiences of outpatient hysteroscopy: implications for a 
patient-centered service. Nurs Health Sci 6(4):315–320. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1442- 2018. 2004. 00202.x

 16.  Gupta JK, Clark TJ, More S, Pattison H (2004) Patient anxiety 
and experiences associated with an outpatient “one-stop” “see and 
treat” hysteroscopy clinic. Surg Endosc 18(7):1099–1104. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00464- 003- 9144-3

 17.  Adambekov S, Lopa S, Edwards RP, Bovbjerg DH, Linkov F, 
Donnellan N (2020) Anxiety and pain in patients undergoing 
pipelle endometrial biopsy: a prospective study [11F]. Obstet 
Gynecol 135:63S. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ 01. AOG. 00006 65100. 
70110. e3

 18  Timmermans A, Opmeer B, Veersema S, Mol B (2007) Patients’ 
preferences in the evaluation of postmenopausal bleeding. BJOG 
Int  J  Obstet  Gynaecol  114(9):1146–1149. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1111/j. 1471- 0528. 2007. 01424.x

 19.  NHS England. NHS England » National tariff payment system 
documents, annexes and supporting documents. https:// www. engla 
nd. nhs. uk/ publi cation/ natio nal- tariff- payme nt- system- docum ents- 
annex es- and- suppo rting- docum ents/. Accessed 20 Feb 2024
 20.  Pleasant V, Pearlman MD (2023) Does tamoxifen use increase 
the risk of endometrial cancer in premenopausal patients? OBG 
Manag 35(8):17–21. https:// doi. org/ 10. 12788/ obgm. 0297
 21.  Vitale SG, Angioni S, D’Alterio MN et al (2024) Risk of endome-
trial malignancy in women treated for breast cancer: the BLUSH 
prediction model - evidence from a comprehensive multicentric 
retrospective cohort study. Climacteric. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 
13697 137. 2024. 23761 89

Publisher's  Note  Springer  Nature  remains  neutral  with  regard  to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
