---
pmid: 40133970
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/40133970
title: Effectiveness of naloxone distribution in community settings to reduce opioid overdose deaths among people who use drugs - a systematic review and meta-analysis.
---

Fischer et al. BMC Public Health         (2025) 25:1135 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-025-22210-8

BMC Public Health

Effectiveness of naloxone distribution 
in community settings to reduce opioid 
overdose deaths among people who use 
drugs: a systematic review and meta-analysis

Leah S. Fischer1*, Alice Asher2,3, Renee Stein2,4, Jeffrey Becasen2, Amanda Doreson2,5, Jonathan Mermin2, Martin 
I. Meltzer1 and Brian R. Edlin1,2

Abstract
Background  It is estimated that over 111,000 people in the U.S. died from a drug overdose in the twelve-month 
period ending in July 2023. More than three-quarters of those deaths were attributed to opioids. Naloxone has long 
been available in healthcare facilities to reverse opioid overdose rapidly and safely but is not universally accessible for 
use in community settings where overdoses occur. We conducted a systematic literature review and meta-analysis 
to assess the effectiveness of overdose education and naloxone distribution (OEND) programs in three types of 
community settings to reduce overdose deaths among people who use opioids nonmedically.

Methods  We systematically searched electronic databases, including Medline (OVID), Embase (OVID), Psycinfo (OVID), 
and Global Health (OVID), for peer-reviewed studies of OEND programs published during 2003–2018 (Group 1) that 
reported overdose outcomes individual level survivals or deaths immediately following naloxone administration. The 
PRISMA checklist guided screening, quality assessment, and data abstraction. We later identified studies published 
during 2018–2022 (Group 2), when drug usage and fentanyl-related overdose deaths notably increased, differed 
from earlier ones. We conducted meta-analyses on both Groups using random effects models to estimate summary 
survival proportions.

Results  Among the 44 Group 1 studies published during 2003–2018, survival did not differ by time (year), location, 
naloxone dose, or route of administration, but studies of OEND programs serving people who use drugs reported 
98.3% (95% CI: 97.5–98.8) survival; those serving family of people who use drugs or other community members 
reported 95.0% (95% CI: 91.4–97.1) survival; and those for police reported 92.4% (95% CI: 88.9–94.8) survival (p < 0.01). 
Five Group 2 studies (2018–2022) yielded similar results.

Conclusions  Community-based naloxone distribution programs can be effective in preventing opioid overdose 
deaths. The paper demonstrates that in the face of increasing overdose deaths over time, survival after naloxone 

*Correspondence:
Leah S. Fischer
lsfischer@cdc.gov

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the US; foreign copyright protection may apply 2025. Open Access  This 
article  is  licensed  under  a  Creative  Commons  Attribution  4.0  International  License,  which  permits  use,  sharing,  adaptation,  distribution  and 
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative 
Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence 
and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit  h t t p  : / /  c r e a  t i  v e c  o m m  o n s .  o r  g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 /.

SYSTEMATIC REVIEWOpen AccessPage 2 of 14

administration has been sustained. The very high survival rates provide clear evidence for public health to continue 
efforts to expand channels for naloxone distribution in community settings.

Keywords  Systematic review, Naloxone, Opioid, Injection drug use, Overdose, Prevention, Syringe services programs, 
Police

Introduction
In the United States, drug overdose is one of the leading 
causes  of  premature  death,  and  the  number  of  opioid-
involved  overdose  deaths  has  increased  steadily  since 
1990 [1, 2, 3]. From 2015 to 2021, the number of opioid 
deaths increased almost 143%, from 33,091 to 80,411 per 
year [2]. 

Death from opioid overdose is preventable through the 
timely  provision  of  naloxone  [4],  a  safe,  non-addictive 
opioid  antagonist  that  can  rapidly  reverse  opioid  over-
dose,  restoring  spontaneous  respiration  and  conscious-
ness.  Naloxone  has  long  been  available  in  healthcare 
facilities to reverse opioid overdose rapidly and safely but 
is  not  universally  accessible  for  use  in  community  set-
tings where overdoses occur [5.6].

Nonfatal opioid overdoses are often witnessed by com-
panions who also use opioids [7]. In the 1990s, commu-
nity  activists  developed  programs  distributing  naloxone 
to  people  who  use  drugs,  often  as  a  part  of  syringe  ser-
vices programs (SSPs), as a response to the rapid rise in 
overdose  deaths  [8,  9].  Stigma,  lack  of  resources,  and 
legal barriers, however, limited implementation of nalox-
one distribution for many years [6, 10, 11]. 

Over  the  years,  as  evidence  accumulated  regarding 
the  safety  and  effectiveness  of  naloxone  administration, 
overdose  education  and  naloxone  distribution  (OEND) 
programs have grown in number [12], and state and local 
public  health  agencies  in  some  locations  have  joined  or 
supported  community-based  programs  distributing  nal-
oxone  to  people  who  use  drugs,  their  peers,  and  part-
ners  [13,  14].  A  2019  online  survey  of  U.S.-based  SSPs 
showed  a  ten-fold  increase  in  the  number  of  OEND 
programs over the previous decade [12]. The majority of 
naloxone distribution, however, was delivered by only 14 
SSPs, underscoring how severely limited existing OEND 
programs  are  in  number,  scope,  and  coverage.  A  recent 
study of naloxone needs in the United States found that 
the  extent  of  naloxone  distribution  warrants  substantial 
expansion in nearly every US state [15]. 

To  inform  decisions  in  public  health  planning  about 
how best to deploy resources to naloxone distribution to 
maximize overdose survival. We, therefore, conducted a 
systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  to  assess  the  exist-
ing evidence on the effectiveness of distributing naloxone 
to people who use drugs and other lay groups to reduce 
overdose  deaths  among  people  who  use  opioids  non-
medically.  We  defined  effectiveness  as  survival  immedi-
ately after naloxone administration. This review updates 

previous reviews [16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21], which generally 
found  naloxone  to  be  successful  at  reversing  overdoses, 
and expands the literature base by adding a meta-analy-
sis  comparing  the  effectiveness  of  naloxone  distribution 
across  three  distinct  populations:  people  who  use  drugs 
(PWUD),  family  and  friends  of  PWUD  and  other  com-
munity  members,  and  police.  Additionally,  because  of 
recent  upsurges  in  drug  use  and  fentanyl-related  opioid 
overdose deaths [2, 3, 22],we compared findings in recent 
years (2018–2022) with those from the previous 15 years 
(2003–2018).

Materials and methods
This  review  encompasses  data  from  two  time  periods. 
We conducted the initial literature search across multiple 
databases  encompassing  papers  published  from  2003  to 
2018  (Group  1).  To  examine  the  previously  mentioned 
potential  impact  of  post-2018  upsurges  in  drug  use  and 
fentanyl-related  opioid  overdose  deaths,  we  updated 
the  search  for  papers  published  between  2018  and  2022 
(Group  2).  For  both  searches,  we  captured  publication 
dates  of  the  included  studies  as  study  years  were  often 
long and overlapping. We used publication date because 
this indicates when reported data were available for pol-
icy-making. No protocol was registered for the review.

Group  1  data  sources,  2003–2018  We  conducted  an 
electronic  literature  search  for  articles  published  from 
January 2003 through June 2018 in the following databases 
(platforms):  Medline  (OVID);  Embase  (OVID);  Psycinfo 
(OVID); Global Health (OVID); CINAHL (EBSCO); NTIS 
(EBSCO); Scopus; and Cochrane Library (See Additional 
file 1, Supplement, Table S1). We also manually searched 
the reference lists of four published literature reviews [16, 
17, 18, 19]. 

Group 2 data sources, 2018–2022  Because most of the 
overdoses  reported  in  Group  1  studies  occurred  before 
fentanyl-related overdose deaths began increasing rapidly 
in 2015 [22], we repeated the search for articles published 
from July 2018 through December 2022 (Group 2) in the 
PubMed system using the same search terms and inclu-
sion  and  exclusion  criteria  and  compared  findings  from 
the  two  time  periods.  We  used  only  PubMed  for  this 
update because > 90% of the 44 papers in the 2003–2018 
group  (See  Additional  file  1,  Supplement,  Table  S2)  are 
indexed in PubMed.

Fischer et al. BMC Public Health         (2025) 25:1135 Page 3 of 14

Study  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria  for  groups  1 
and 2  We limited the review to peer-reviewed reports of 
studies  published  in  English  from  January  2003  through 
December  2022,  conducted  in  the  United  States,  Can-
ada,  Australia,  or  Europe,  that  reported  on  community-
based programs, such as harm reduction programs, that 
provided  OEND  to  lay  persons  (people  without  profes-
sional or specialized knowledge in substance use disorder 
or  healthcare).  We  included  only  studies  that  provided 
descriptions of the study population, the intervention(s), 
and our primary outcome measures. We excluded studies 
of interventions based in healthcare settings such as the 
emergency department and pharmacies, solely qualitative 
studies, reviews, case studies/series, dissertations, letters, 
and  editorials.  There  were  no  screening  criteria  related 
sample  size  or  study  design.  A  national  survey  report-
ing overdose outcomes from OEND programs across the 
United States [13] was excluded because some of the data 
duplicate those reported by some studies in this review.

Outcomes for groups 1 and 2  The primary outcome of 
interest was reported individual level survivals or deaths 
immediately following naloxone administration. We con-
sidered reports of overdose “reversals,” “successful rever-
sals,” “rescues,” and “survivals” as survivals, and reports of 
“deaths” or “unsuccessful” interventions as deaths. Addi-
tional  outcomes  abstracted  as  available  were  number  of 
persons  who  received  overdose  training  and  naloxone, 
number  of  naloxone  kits  distributed,  number  of  study 
participants, the number of persons with follow-up data 
(if  they  returned,  for  example,  for  a  refill,  prospectively 
scheduled follow-up, or another reason), and the number 
of overdoses in which participants intervened to adminis-
ter naloxone. Follow-up was considered passive when nal-
oxone  use  was  ascertained  only  if  participants  returned 
to the program to obtain a naloxone refill or for another 
reason. When studies did not specify the number of par-
ticipants with follow-up data, we used other information 
authors reported as minimum estimates to infer this value, 
in the following order: 1) the number of participants who 
reported using naloxone; 2) the number of overdoses for 
which participants reported using naloxone; or 3) number 
of naloxone reversals reported. We also identified a small 
sub-group  (N = 5)  of  papers  that  reported  community-
levels of incidence of naloxone-related survival following 
life-threatening overdoses. The data in these papers could 
not be used in our statistical meta-analyses, but we quali-
tatively examined and reported their outcomes.

Group  1  study  selection  and  data  extraction,  2003–
2018  We  used  web-based  systematic  review  software 
(DistillerSR,  Evidence  Partners,  Ottawa,  Canada)  to 
create  forms,  screen  articles,  and  extract  data.  The  lead 
reviewer and one or two additional reviewers screened all 

titles and abstracts using a structured form. One reviewer 
was  needed  to  include  a  study  and  two  were  required 
to  exclude  a  study.  Two  reviewers  then  independently 
reviewed  all  full-text  articles  using  a  structured  data 
abstraction  form  to  record  intervention  characteristics, 
study characteristics, and outcomes. Reviewers reconciled 
discordant  screening  assessments  and  data  abstraction 
conflicts though joint review and discussion, consulting a 
third team member when necessary for resolution.

Group  2  study  selection  and  data  extraction,  2018–
2022  Using  PubMed  for  the  Group  2  literature  search, 
we  applied  the  same  selection  criteria  that  we  used  for 
the  Group  1  search.  As  mentioned  above,  we  used  only 
PubMed for the update because > 90% of the 44 papers in 
the 2003–2018 group (See Additional file 1, Supplement, 
Table S2) are indexed in PubMed. Rather than using Dis-
tiller software to abstract data, for the update, we manu-
ally abstracted data directly into an Excel spreadsheet.

Group  1  study  quality  assessment,  2003–2018  The 
Community  Guide  methodology  to  assess  intervention 
effectiveness informed our approach to assess study qual-
ity [23]. We tailored a set of ten Likert-scale questions in 
the following five domains to meet the needs of the review 
for studies reporting individual-level outcomes: descrip-
tion of the program being evaluated and the study meth-
ods, sampling, measurement of outcomes, data analysis, 
and interpretation of results. We report results separately 
for  each  question  because  assigning  a  value  to  the  rela-
tive importance of each item would have been arbitrary or 
subjective [24]. No study was excluded from the analysis 
because of poor study quality.

Group 2 study quality assessment, 2018–2022  We did 
not  assess  the  quality  of  the  Group  2  studies  due  to  the 
paucity of identified studies. Similar to the methodology 
used for Group 1, no Group 2 paper was excluded due to 
poor quality.

Data analyses for groups 1 and 2  Data extracted from 
studies  reporting  individual-level  data  were  exported  to 
Excel for data synthesis and analysis; we separately sum-
marized  and  reported  qualitatively  the  small  sub-set  of 
studies  reporting  community-level  data.  We  calculated 
the  proportion  of  reported  survivals  per  naloxone  use, 
defined  as  the  proportion  of  people  who  remained  alive 
after  receiving  naloxone  among  all  people  for  whom  an 
outcome was reported. In other words, the outcome met-
ric was the calculated proportion of people surviving after 
receiving  naloxone,  which  was  the  number  of  reported 
“survivals”  as  the  numerator  and  the  total  number  of 
reported outcomes as the denominator. Survival propor-
tions are reported separately and compared for programs 

Fischer et al. BMC Public Health         (2025) 25:1135 Page 4 of 14

that  enrolled  PWUD,  family  or  friends  of  PWUD  and 
other  community  members,  and  police.  When  studies 
reported  separately  on  multiple  groups,  such  as  PWUD 
and family members, we examined the data on each group 
separately.

Meta-analyses for groups 1 and 2  Meta-analyses were 
conducted  separately  for  each  Group,  using  survival  as 
the  outcome  variable.  Group  survival  proportions  and 
95%  confidence  intervals  (CIs)  were  calculated  for  all 
studies overall and were compared among subgroups by 
the  following  variables:  Population  who  received  OEND 
(PWUD,  family  of  PWUD  or  community  members, 
police),  location  (US  vs.  non-US),  time  (year),  naloxone 
dose and route of administration (injected vs. nasal), and 
training  duration.  Comparisons  between  groups  were 
conducted  using  the  Comprehensive  Meta-Analysis 
software  (Biostat,  Englewood,  NJ).  For  subgroup  com-
parisons,  we  used  random  effects  models  to  calculate 
summary  estimates  of  survival,  the  DerSimonian–Laird 
methods  to  estimate  between-study  variance,  and  the 
inverse-variance  to  weight  each  study.  An  alpha  of  0.05 
was used to assess statistical significance.

Sensitivity analysis and robustness  We evaluated con-
ducting a sensitivity analysis using only studies that had 
“high  follow-up”  and  another  sensitivity  analysis  that 
would exclude studies deemed to be of “poor quality.” We 
also evaluated robustness of our results by first focusing 
on studies with larger sample sizes (> 1,000 enrolled par-
ticipants). Larger sample sizes generate smaller standard 
errors  and  smaller  degrees  of  uncertainty  (i.e.,  smaller 
confidence  intervals).  We  also  evaluated  robustness  by 
producing  2  “funnel  plots”  that  analyzed  the  potential 
degree  of  publication  bias  and  a  “trim-and-fill”  funnel 
plot to estimate the potential impact of “missing” studies. 
The first funnel plot charts the estimates of effectiveness 
(i.e.,  %  survival)  of  each  study  against  that  study’s  vari-
ance (precision). The trim-and-fill plot then examines the 
potential  effect  of  including  representative  estimates  of 
sizes and variance that the first funnel plot indicates may 
be missing from the included studies.

Reporting  We  used  the  Preferred  Reporting  Items 
for  Systematic  Reviews  and  Meta-Analyses  (PRISMA) 
reporting  checklist  to  guide  the  reporting  of  this  review 
[25]. (See Additional file 2, PRISMA checklist).

Results
Group 1 article search, 2003–2018

inclusion  criteria  including  one  study  identified  from  a 
manual search of existing literature review reference lists 
(See Fig. 1 and Additional file 1, Supplement, Table S2). 
Three review papers included only one study – Dettmer 
(2001)  –  published  before  2003  and  for  this  reason  we 
included it. We report on 41 studies of OEND programs 
with individual-level outcome data and five studies with 
community-level  data,  including  two  that  reported  both 
individual- and community-level outcomes (See Table 1).

Group 2 article search, 2018–2022

A  PubMed  search  yielded  1,181  citations  published  in 
English  from  July  2018  through  December  2022,  from 
which  198  titles  were  selected  for  abstract  screening. 
From a review of abstracts, we identified nine studies that 
met  the  original  review  criteria,  excluding  189  because 
they were not community-based studies of naloxone dis-
tribution programs, did not report outcome data, or were 
qualitative studies (See Fig. 1).

Group 1 studies reporting individual-level outcomes 
(N = 41), 2003–2018

Group 1 study characteristics  The 41 studies with individ-
ual-level data were conducted in the U.S. (n = 29), Canada 
(n = 5), and Europe (n = 7) and delivered OEND to people 
who used drugs (n = 30), family, friends, and others (n = 6), 
and  police  (n = 7)  (See  Table  1).  Median  study  size  was 
316  participants  (range,  91–40,801;  interquartile  range, 
99–1,322). Injectable naloxone was distributed in 25 stud-
ies, nasal naloxone in 14, and both in 2 (See Additional file 
1, Supplement, Table S4). The median duration of OEND 
training was 30 min, ranging from 2 min to 8 h (See Addi-
tional file 1, Supplement, Table S4).

Intervention characteristics changed over time, reflect-
ing the evolution of innovations in program practices and 
policies.  (See  Additional  file  1,  Supplement,  Table  S6). 
Early programs distributed injectable naloxone and ster-
ile  syringes  at  SSPs  to  people  who  injected  drugs;  later 
programs  distributed  nasal  naloxone  and  began  enroll-
ing  family  members,  other  community  members,  and, 
still  later,  law  enforcement  personnel  (See  Additional 
file  1,  Supplement,  Tables  S4  and  S6).  After  2007,  pro-
gram  venues  expanded  beyond  SSPs  to  include  settings 
such  as  homeless  shelters,  community  centers,  and  cor-
rectional  facilities.  OEND  programs  designed  for  police 
in our review were first implemented in 2013 [26]. Train-
ing duration declined over time, as programs switched to 
nasal naloxone (See Additional file 1, Supplement, Table 
S6).

A  CDC  library-assisted  search  yielded  2,870  citations 
published  from  January  2003  through  June  2018.  After 
duplicates  were  removed,  we  identified  297  citations 
for  full-text  review  and  of  these,  determined  44  met 

Group 1 study quality, 2003–2018  Overall, most reports 
contained  clear  descriptions  of  the  population  served 
(n = 36); more than half provided a thorough or very thor-
ough  description  of  OEND  training,  including  informa-

Fischer et al. BMC Public Health         (2025) 25:1135 Page 5 of 14

Fig. 1  PRISMA flow diagram of study selection process for systematic review covering two time periods: 2003–2018 and 2018–2022

Fischer et al. BMC Public Health         (2025) 25:1135  
41

30
6
7

Table 1  Characteristics of 44 studies in systematic review of 
Naloxone distribution programs (2003–2018)^
Studies with individual-level outcome data
Population served*
  People who use drugs
  Family, friends, others
  Law enforcement personnel
Location
  United States
  Canada
  United Kingdom
  Other Europe†
Follow-up method
  Passive
  Prospectively scheduled
  Only participants with follow-up included
  Not specified (law enforcement personnel studies)
Type of naloxone used

18
12
4
7

29
5
5
2

Injected

25
14
2

  Nasal
  Both
Studies with community-level outcome data
Location
  United States
  United Kingdom
Total studies‡
^See Table 3 for 2018–2022 data. *Two U.S. studies reported on programs for 
both  people  who  use  drugs  and  family  members.  †Other  Europe = Norway, 
Germany,  Channel  Islands.  ‡Two  U.S.  studies  reported  both  individual-  and 
community-level data

4
1

44

5

Page 6 of 14

from  participant  sampling.  Reporting  of  outcomes  was 
considered clear in 20 of the 41 studies and complete in 
15; 10 did not specify certain denominators, such as total 
number  of  participants  or  numbers  of  kits  distributed 
(See  Additional  file  1,  Supplement,  Table  S3).  Investiga-
tors reporting the findings in 14 studies were somewhat 
independent  or  strictly  independent  from  program  staff 
carrying  out  the  intervention,  and  not  very  or  not  at  all 
independent  in  17  studies.  The  relationship  was  not 
described, or we could not tell in 10. Eight of 41 studies 
did  not  discuss  study  limitations.  Overall,  most  of  the 
studies were categorized as being “good quality.”

Group  1  data  reporting  follow-up,  2003–2018  (41  stud-
ies)  Participant follow-up varied by study and follow-up 
methods  used.  In  many  studies  follow-up  was  passive; 
follow-up  data  were  collected  only  when  participants 
returned for refills or to receive other services. When fol-
low-up was prospectively scheduled, the interval ranged 
from two to 12 months, with a three-month interval uti-
lized  most  frequently  [27–32]  The  median  proportion 
of participants with follow-up data was 10.5% among 18 
studies that used passive follow-up but 74.5% in 12 stud-
ies  with  prospectively  scheduled  follow-up.  Four  stud-
ies, by design, included only participants with follow-up 
data, and follow-up was not described in the seven police 
studies.

Group 1 individual-level outcomes, 2003–2018

tion about naloxone preparation (n = 23) (See Additional 
file  1,  Supplement,  Table  S3).  Most  papers  contained 
clear descriptions of study methods with respect to study 
design  (n = 32),  study  participant  sampling  (n = 29),  and 
specification  of  outcomes  (n = 31).  Six  studies  described 
how  authors  addressed  potential  selection  bias  arising 

The  41  studies  reported  individual-level  data  on  74,114 
study  participants,  who  reported  outcomes  (survival 
or  death)  after  10,328  naloxone  administrations  (See 
Table 2). Survival did not differ by location (US vs. other 
countries),  time  (year),  training  duration,  or  naloxone 
dose  or  route  of  administration.  Survival  estimates  did 

Table 2  Outcomes in 41 studies reporting individual-level data (2003–2018)^

No. studies No. Participants

Kits Distributed

Population served†
  People who used drugs
  Family, friends, others
  Police
Route of administration§

Injection

30
6
7

64,947
7,868
1,299‡

75,375
8,414
1,556‡

Survivals 
Reported

8,686
239
1,200

Deaths Reported Summary Sur-

vival Propor-
tion (95% CI)*

98.3% (97.5, 98.8)
95.0% (91.4, 97.1)
92.4% (88.9, 94.8)

100
10
93

25
14

15,990
56,322‡

19,506
63,288‡

3,106
6,292

15
178

97.9% (96.2, 98.8)
97.7% (94.1, 97.9)

  Nasal
Naloxone dose (by injection)¶
16,056
  0.4 mg
2,110
  0.8 mg – 2.0 mg**
85,345
Total
^See  Table  3  for  2018–2022  data.  *Proportion  surviving  among  events  with  known  outcome  (survival  or  death)  calculated  using  random  effects  models.  †Two 
studies reported on data from both people who used drugs and other community members (family, friends, others). ‡Data missing (no. of participants and kits) for 
3 studies. §Two studies that used both nasal and injected naloxone are excluded. ¶Includes only studies that used injected naloxone and specified the dose. **The 
dose was 1.0 mg in 3 of the 5 studies

98.2% (95.8, 99.2)
97.0% (94.1, 98.5)
97.3% (96.1, 98.2)

13,467
1,658
74,114

2,653
175
10,125

13
0
203

16
5
41†

Fischer et al. BMC Public Health         (2025) 25:1135  
 
Page 7 of 14

differ,  however,  by  the  population  to  whom  OEND  was 
provided (See Table 2).

Group 2 studies reporting individual-level outcomes, 
2018–2022

Of the nine studies that met inclusion criteria, five were 
conducted  in  the  US  (four  studies  with  individual-level 
data, one with county-level data), two in Scandinavia, one 
in  Canada,  and  one  in  Australia  (See  Table  3).  Among 
the  Group  2  studies,  survival  proportions  across  groups 
that  received  OEND/administered  naloxone  were  simi-
lar to that in the Group 1 studies (See Table 3). Survival 
in 4 studies of programs serving PWUD was 96-100%; in 
3  studies  of  programs  distributing  naloxone  to  PWUD 
and  other  lay  persons  survival  was  96-97%;  and  the  sin-
gle  evaluation  of  a  training  program  for  police  reported 
a  95%  survival  (See  Table  3).  In  the  only  study  in  our 
review to enroll PWUD, family members, other commu-
nity members, and police all in the same study, the odds 
of PWUD administering naloxone to someone to reverse 
an overdose were more than 8 times the odds that people 
in the other groups did so [33]. A ninth study examined 
changes in county-level overdose death rates before and 
after  OEND  implementation  in  the  38  North  Carolina 
counties with the most opioid overdoses [34].

Group  2  study  quality  and  patient  follow-up,  2018–
2022  As detailed in Methods, there were so few studies 
that  met  inclusion  criteria,  we  included  all  regardless  of 
study  quality.  As  in  Group  1  (2003–2018)  most  of  the 
studies were considered to be of “good quality.” However, 
of  the  nine  studies  that  met  the  original  review  criteria, 
only  5  reported  data  sufficient  to  include  in  the  meta-
analysis. None of the studies provide sufficient details on 
patient follow-up after the initial use of naloxone.

Meta-analyses:  survival  for  groups  1  and  2  Overall, 
from  the  random  effects  model  for  all  Group  1  studies, 
97.3%  (95%  CI:  96.1–98.3)  of  persons  who  received  nal-
oxone survived (SeFig. . 2). Average survival in Group 1 
studies  of  programs  serving  people  who  use  drugs  was 
98.3%  (95%  CI:  97.5–98.8);  in  programs  serving  family 
of people who use drugs or other community members, 
95.0% (95% CI: 91.4–97.1); and in programs distributing 
naloxone to police, 92.4% (95% CI: 88.9–94.8) (SeFig. . 2). 
Considerable  heterogeneity  existed  between  all  studies 
(I2 = 76%, p < 0.01), but decreased for studies categorized 
by  group  to  whom  naloxone  was  distributed:  PWUD 
(I2 = 38%,  p = 0.02);  family/friends  (I2 = 0%,  p = 0.87);  and 
law enforcement (I2 = 50%, p = 0.06) (See Fig. 2).

Similar  to  the  results  for  Group1,  studies  in  Group  2, 
96.0%  ((95%  CI:94-97%)  of  persons  who  received  nalox-
one  survived  (See  Fig.  2).  The  meta-analysis  of  these  5 
studies had a Heterogeneity I [2] of 3% (p = 0.39), indicat-
ing  very  little  variance  between  studies.  The  p  value  of 
0.39  is  likely  due  to  the  wide  confidence  intervals  mea-
sured  in  the  Lintzeris  et  al.  study  (See  Table  3;  Fig.  2). 
These  results  from  Group  2  indicate  that  the  post-2018 
upsurges  in  drug  use  and  fentanyl-related  opioid  over-
dose  deaths  did  not  negatively  impact  the  effectiveness, 
at  an  individual  level,  of  community  and  police-based 
naloxone programs.

Sensitivity analysis and robustness  We found, for two 
reasons, that it was technically not feasible to conduct a 
sensitivity analysis using only studies that had “high fol-
low-up” of OEND program participants that returned, for 
instance,  for  a  refill  of  naloxone. The  first  reason  is  that 
there were only 10 studies, with varying timelines, out of 
the  original  44  studies  (2003–2018)  that  reported  active 
follow-up  protocols.  And  those  that  reported  had  dif-
fering  periods  of  follow-up  ranging  from  2  months  to  8 

Deaths*

Location

Survivals*

No. participants

Population served

Included in meta-analyses

Australia
Baltimore
New York
Sweden
Michigan
Canada
United States Mixed¶
Mixed#
Denmark

Table 3  Characteristics and outcomes for studies published during 2018–2022 (N = 9)
Author (Year)**
Studies reporting individual-level data
Lintzeris (2020)
Buresh (2020)
Jones (2022)
Troberg (2022)
Janssen (2020)
Williams (2021)
Yang (2021)
Thylstrup (2019)
Total
Study reporting community-level data
Naumann (2019) No. Carolina
*Percentages  are  of  events  with  known  outcomes  (survival  or  death).  **  For  full  references,  see  Table  S2.  Articles  included  in  systematic  literature  review  on 
community-based  naloxone  distribution  programs  (2003–2022).  †PWUD = People  who  use  drugs.  ‡Number  of  participants  recruited  from  community-based 
locations. §NR = Not Reported. ¶Mixed = People who used drugs and other community members. #Mixed = People who used drugs, other community members, 
and law enforcement

145
PWUD†
346
PWUD
321
PWUD
165‡
PWUD
Police
508
Community service providers NR§
3,609
552
5,646

Yes
(0.0%)
Yes
(4.2%)
Yes
(3.0%)
Yes
(0.0%)
(5.4%)
Yes
(1.5%) No
(2.6%) No
(4.2%) No

(100.0%)
(95.8%)
(97.0%)
(100.0%)
(94.6%)
(98.5%)
(97.4%)
(95.8%)

9
68
161
123
174
1,517
335
23
2,410

352 overdose deaths averted/3 years

0
3
5
0
10
23
9
1
51

No

Fischer et al. BMC Public Health         (2025) 25:1135 Page 8 of 14

Fig. 2  Forest plot of studies of naloxone distribution programs with individual-level survival data: Group 1 (2003-2018) and Group 2 (2018-2022). *Note: 
‘Group’ refers to ‘study sample distributed naloxone’

Fischer et al. BMC Public Health         (2025) 25:1135  
Page 9 of 14

months (See Additional file 1, Supplement, Table S5). The 
remainder reported “passive” follow up. The second prob-
lem was some of those that had an active follow-up period 
had  very  small  enrollments.  For  example,  Seal  (2005) 
had 25 participants enrolled (with a 6-month follow-up), 
Galea (2006) had 25 participants (3-month follow-up) and 
Wagner (2010) had 66 participants enrolled (3 month fol-
low up) (See Additional file 1, Supplement, Table S5). For 
sensitivity analysis that would exclude studies deemed to 
be of “poor quality,” most of the studies were evaluated as 
being  of  “good  quality”  (described  earlier).  A  sensitivity 
analysis that focused on only those of good quality would 
basically repeat the analysis already done (See Fig. . 2).

For  evaluating  robustness,  considering  only  the  10 
studies  that  enrolled  at  least  1,000  participants  (See 
Additional  file  1,  Supplement,  Table  S5),  it  can  readily 
be seen in Fig. 2 that those studies have higher averages, 
and  smaller  confidence  intervals,  than  the  overall  aver-
age (i.e., the plots for those 10 studies are “to the right” of 
the red diamond, which plots the average for all studies). 
We therefore conclude that our results are robust. Using 
funnel plots to further examine robustness, we found that 
our  first  funnel  plot  (See  Additional  file  1,  Supplement, 
Figure S1A) indicated that there may be missing studies 
with  lower  survival  and  higher  variance  (bottom  left-
hand quadrant) [35]. The trim-and-fill funnel plot added 
in  6  imputed  “missing”  studies  (plotted  as  white  circles 
in  Additional  file  1,  Supplement,  Figure  S1B).  Adjusting 
overall summary estimates, no substantial impact of pub-
lication  bias  on  our  summary  estimates  was  observed. 
The  original  estimate  of  survival  was  97.3%  (95%  CI: 
96.1–98.3);  with  adjustment  using  trim-and-fit  method-
ology, it was 96.5% (95.0–97.6).

Studies reporting community-level outcomes (N = 5)

Five  studies  reported  community-level  overdose  death 
data  where  naloxone  distribution  programs  were  insti-
tuted.  Two  of  these  also  reported  individual-level  data 
and were included in the analysis presented above.

A report on an OEND program that distributed > 3,500 
naloxone  vials  to  people  who  injected  drugs  in  Chicago 
included Cook County overdose data showing a 2.4-fold 
rise in annual overdose deaths during the 4 years before 
the  program  started  in  January  2001,  followed  by  a  30% 
reduction in deaths during the 3 years after the program 
began [36].

An  interrupted  time  series  analysis  examined  opioid 
overdose  mortality  rates  in  communities  in  Massachu-
setts with no OEND implementation, low OEND imple-
mentation (1–100 people trained per 100,000 population) 
and  high  OEND  implementation  (> 100  people  trained 
per  100,000  population).  After  adjusting  for  community 
level  demographics  and  substance  use  factors,  authors 
found  27%  and  46%  reductions  in  opioid  overdose 

mortality rates in the low- and high-implementing com-
munities,  respectively,  when  compared  with  communi-
ties with no OEND implementation [37].

A spatial analysis examined the locations of 316 opioid 
overdose reversals and 342 overdose deaths in San Fran-
cisco.  Naloxone  distribution  sites  were  located  in  areas 
with  greater  numbers  of  drug  arrests  and  historically 
endemic  levels  of  substance  use.  In  analyses  that  con-
trolled for other factors, geographic proximity to a nalox-
one  distribution  site  was  associated  with  more  frequent 
overdose reversals by means of naloxone administration, 
but not opioid overdose deaths [38].

In  January  2011,  Scotland  began  providing  naloxone 
to prisoners on release from its prisons. A before (2006-
10)  -after  (2011-13)  comparison  of  Scotland’s  National 
Naloxone Programme found a 36% reduction in the pro-
portion  of  opioid-related  deaths  in  prisoners  during  the 
4  weeks  following  their  release  from  prison  after  the 
program  was  initiated  [39]. These  results  led  to  the  dis-
continuation  of  a  randomized  trial  underway  in  English 
prisons of naloxone on release, and the provision of nal-
oxone to all participants [40].

Investigators in San Francisco reported on the response 
of the city’s naloxone distribution program to the intro-
duction  of  fentanyl  into  the  local  illicit  drug  supply, 
which  had  been  associated  with  large  increases  in  drug 
overdoses  in  communities  across  the  nation  [41].  In 
San  Francisco,  the  program  intensified  community  out-
reach and naloxone distribution as soon as fentanyl was 
detected.  New  participant  enrollment  increased  55%, 
naloxone  refills  increased  89%,  and  reported  overdose 
reversals increased 113% compared with the same time-
frame  the  previous  year  (all  p < 0.001),  but  there  was  no 
significant  increase  in  the  number  of  opioid-involved 
overdose  deaths.  The  authors  concluded  that  the  nalox-
one distribution program may have helped avert the large 
increases in drug overdose deaths that accompanied the 
introduction  of  illegally  made  fentanyl  elsewhere  in  the 
United States.

Discussion
Naloxone is a life-saving medication capable of reversing 
potentially fatal opioid overdoses. Our systematic review 
revealed high rates of successful resuscitation by lay per-
sons  in  41  studies,  including  people  who  used  drugs, 
their friends and family and other community members, 
and  police.  In  all,  more  than  10,000  successful  overdose 
reversals  were  reported.  Our  review  found  high  sur-
vival  rates  (93-98%)  following  the  use  of  naloxone  when 
persons  trained  and  administering  the  medication  were 
PWUD, family members, or police. A national survey of 
naloxone distribution programs in the United States, not 
included in this review because of potentially overlapping 
data,  told  the  same  story:  naloxone  distributed  in  136 

Fischer et al. BMC Public Health         (2025) 25:1135 Page 10 of 14

programs  resulted  in  more  than  26,000  reported  over-
dose reversals [13]. 

These studies included no comparison groups, so how 
many  of  these  overdoses  would  have  resulted  in  death 
had  OEND  not  been  implemented  is  unknown.  How-
ever, six studies in our review using pre-post designs, an 
interrupted time series analysis, and a spatial distribution 
analysis assessed the effects of OEND programs on local 
overdose rates in Chicago, Massachusetts, San Francisco, 
Scotland,  and  North  Carolina.  All  six  studies  found  evi-
dence  of  the  programs’  effectiveness,  including  substan-
tial reductions in overdose mortality (25-46%) in three of 
the studies. The sixth study estimated that naloxone dis-
tribution in North Carolina averted 352 overdose deaths 
over a three-year period, at a cost of $1,605 per life saved 
[34].

While 1.7% of overdosing persons died in studies when 
naloxone  was  distributed  to  PWUD,  5.0%  died  when 
it  was  distributed  to  family,  friends,  and  other  commu-
nity members, and 7.6% died when it was distributed to 
police. Possible reasons for differences could be proxim-
ity to the overdose event and time to naloxone adminis-
tration.  PWUD  are  more  likely  than  family  members  or 
police  to  be  present  or  nearby  at  the  time  of  overdose 
and  able  to  administer  naloxone  in  the  early  stages  of 
overdose onset. They are often experienced in the use of 
needles,  syringes,  and  percutaneous  injection,  and  most 
have  prior  experience  witnessing  overdose  [7].  While 
survival  after  law  enforcement  naloxone  administration 
was  high  (92.4%),  it  was  the  lowest  of  the  three  groups, 
likely  because  emergency  services  are  often  not  sum-
moned  until  an  overdose  has  progressed  to  late  stages 
[42, 44]. Evidence also indicates that police may feel less 
confident, after training, in administering naloxone than 
other groups [45].

Comprehensive  community-based  programs 

that 
include syringe services programs integrated with linkage 
to medication to treat opioid use disorder, naloxone dis-
tribution, HIV care, and viral hepatitis testing and treat-
ment are likely to be particularly effective in the mutual 
goals of preventing overdose deaths, reducing substance 
use,  and  preventing  infectious  diseases.  A  modelling 
study  that  examined  the  cost-effectiveness  of  naloxone 
distribution through SSPs for people who use drugs with 
or  without  treatment  for  substance  use  disorder  found 
naloxone distribution alone was cost-effective at $323 per 
quality-adjusted life year, and with the addition of linkage 
to treatment for substance use disorders was cost-saving 
[46].

Our  review  is  subject  to  several  limitations.  First,  fol-
low-up was low in many studies. Our analysis most likely 
underestimates  overdose  event  outcomes.  Studies  often 
included only reversals reported by people who returned 
for  refill  or  were  in  a  prospective  study,  excluding 

reversals  that  may  have  been  performed  by  participants 
who  did  not  return  and  report  their  experiences.  Both 
successful  and  unsuccessful  naloxone  administrations 
were likely underreported, and we did not examine pos-
sible  outcomes  that  occur  after  initial  survival.  Second, 
our  findings  could  be  subject  to  publication  or  small 
study bias. People implementing programs may be more 
motivated  to  report  successes  than  failures.  Our  funnel 
plot  and  “trim-and-fill”  analyses,  however,  yielded  little 
evidence  of  such  bias  (Figure  S1B).  We  did  not  review 
unpublished  reports,  or  program  or  health  department 
reports not published in scientific literature, whose find-
ings  might  differ  from  the  studies  we  reviewed.  Third, 
many  of  the  evaluations  were  not  independent;  often 
they  were  conducted  by  people  involved  in  running  the 
programs  or  collaborating  with  them.  Fourth,  overdoses 
reversed  do  not  necessarily  translate  into  reduced  over-
dose  deaths,  because  some  people  may  have  survived 
without  receiving  naloxone  or  after  receiving  it  from 
emergency  medical  services.  Findings  from  six  studies 
reporting community-level overdose rates, however, con-
sistently  reported  lifesaving  effects  of  community-based 
naloxone  distribution  programs.  Finally,  after  a  search 
timeframe for a review ends, potentially relevant papers 
are  published  on  an  ongoing  basis.  For  example,  using 
the  original  search  strategy,  a  search  in  PubMed  found 
three  papers  published  during  Jan.  2022-Oct.  2024  that 
met the review criteria [47–49]. These studies contained 
no notable differences in conclusions than those found in 
this review.

As opioid overdoses increasingly involve synthetic opi-
oids  such  as  illegally  made  fentanyl  including  fentanyl 
analogs and the combined usage of opioids together with 
benzodiazepines  or  other  sedatives,  it  becomes  increas-
ingly important to be sure naloxone is available when and 
where it is needed so it can be used as soon as possible. 
Further,  as  fentanyl  contamination  is  increasingly  found 
in  drugs  sold  as  methamphetamine,  cocaine  or  other 
drugs  not  identified  as  an  opioid  [50],  it  is  important  to 
ensure that all PWUD know how to identify an overdose 
and administer naloxone to save the lives of their peers. 
Ensuring PWUD, particularly populations disproportion-
ately impacted by overdose, have access to this life-saving 
intervention is critical as overdose deaths remain at his-
toric levels [2]. Including PWUD as equal partners in the 
design  and  execution  of  overdose  prevention  efforts  is 
necessary for these efforts to be successful [8, 14]. 

Our  findings  support  previously  published  studies 
regarding  the  effectiveness  of  widespread  naloxone  dis-
tribution  to  people  who  use  illicit  drugs  [10,  15,51–54]. 
Distribution  of  naloxone  to  people  who  use  drugs  has 
been  constrained  by  several  barriers,  including  stigma, 
[10, 55, 56], insufficient funding [15,57], legal constraints 
[58, 59], naloxone pricing [60, 61]. supply chain shortages 

Fischer et al. BMC Public Health         (2025) 25:1135 [62],  manufacturing  problems  [63,  64],  and  regulatory 
processes [65].

Efforts to overcome these barriers are underway. Com-
munity  members,  researchers,  service  providers,  and 
non-profit  organizations  have  created  novel  pathways, 
along  with  federal  partners,  to  provide  naloxone  at  low 
cost  to  under  resourced  community  programs  provid-
ing  OEND  to  people  who  use  drugs  [57,  66–68].  The 
Food and Drug Administration has taken steps to relieve 
regulatory  impediments  encumbering  naloxone  distri-
bution  through  nonmedical  community  organizations 
[69]  and  has  approved  an  over-the-counter  nasal  nalox-
one device [70] made by a non-profit manufacturer who 
will  distribute  it  to  programs  in  need  at  low  or  no  cost 
[71, 72]. The White House has put forth model naloxone 
access  laws  for  states  to  consider  [73]  and  has  met  with 
naloxone manufacturers to urge them to increase nalox-
one access and affordability for at-risk communities and 
organizations serving high-risk individuals [74]. The Sub-
stance  Abuse  and  Mental  Health  Administration  funds 
states, tribes, and communities to purchase naloxone and 
develop  plans  to  saturate  their  communities  with  nal-
oxone.  The  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention 
funds  OEND  through  the  Overdose  Data  to  Action  in 
States and Localities programs [75]  and provides imple-
mentation toolkits and other materials through the Stop 
Overdose  campaign  [14,  76],  Concerted  action  by  com-
munity members, nonprofit organizations, governments, 
and industry, partnering with people who use drugs, can 
make  substantial  progress  to  close  the  gap  toward  mak-
ing  naloxone  available  when  and  where  it  is  needed  to 
reduce overdose deaths.

Conclusions
Community-based  naloxone  distribution  programs  can 
be  effective  in  preventing  opioid  overdose  deaths.  The 
paper  demonstrates  that  in  the  face  of  increasing  over-
dose  deaths  over  time,  survival  after  naloxone  adminis-
tration  has  been  sustained.  The  very  high  survival  rates 
provide  clear  evidence  for  public  health  to  continue 
efforts  to  expand  channels  for  naloxone  distribution  in 
community settings.

Abbreviations
OEND 
PWUD 
CIs 

 Overdose education and naloxone distribution
 People who use drugs
 Confidence intervals

Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r 
g /  1 0 .  1 1 8 6  / s  1 2 8 8 9 - 0 2 5 - 2 2 2 1 0 - 8.

Supplementary Material 1

Supplementary Material 2

Page 11 of 14

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Vishakha Ramakrishnan for her assistance with data 
abstraction and Adam Langer for his careful review and indispensable 
feedback to help us get past the finish line.

Author contributions
Name and contribution- LSF Conceptualization, Project administration, Data 
curation, Investigation, Methodology Formal analysis, Validation, Supervision 
Writing – original draft preparation, review & editing; AA Methodology Writing 
- review & editing; RS Methodology, Investigation, Writing - review & editing; 
JB Methodology, Formal Analysis, Writing - review & editing; AD  
Methodology, Investigation, Writing - review & editing; JM Funding 
Acquisition, Conceptualization Writing - review & editing; MIM 
Writing - review & editing; BRE 
analysis Validation, Writing - review & editing, Supervision.

Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal 

Funding
No funding was provided for this study, which was conducted as part of the 
authors’ routine work.

Data availability
All data generated or analysed during this study are included in this published 
article and its supplementary information files.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
This activity was reviewed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) and was conducted consistent with applicable federal law and CDC 
policy. See e.g., 45 C.F.R. part 46; 21 C.F.R. part 56; 42 U.S.C. § 241(d), 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552a, 44 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq.

Consent for publication
This paper does not contain any individual, personal identifying information, 
and accessed only previously published anonymous and aggregated data. 
There was no human participation or human subjects involved in this study.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Author disclaimer
The findings and conclusions in this manuscript are those of the authors and 
do not necessarily represent the views of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.

Human ethics and consent to participate declarations
This project only used previously published anonymous and aggregated data 
and was determined to be “Exempt Human Subjects Research” (under U.S. 
Federal statute 45 CFR 104(D) 1–8).

Author details
1Present address: National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious 
Diseases, Atlanta, GA, United States of America
2National Center for HIV/AIDS, STD and TB Prevention, Viral Hepatitis, 
Atlanta, GA, United States of America
3Present address: National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, 
Atlanta, GA, United States of America
4Present address: Immediate Office of the Director, Atlanta, GA, United 
States of America
5Present address: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration, Rockville, MD, United States of America

Received: 17 May 2024 / Accepted: 6 March 2025

References
1. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Unintentional and undetermined 
poisoning deaths—11 states, 1990–2001. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
2004;53(11):233-8. PMID: 15041950.

Fischer et al. BMC Public Health         (2025) 25:1135 2. 

3. 

4. 

Spencer MR, Miniño AM, Warner M. Drug overdose deaths in the united 
States, 2001–2021. NCHS Data Brief. 2022;457:1–8. PMID: 36598401.
Fujita-Imazu S, Xie J, Dhungel B, Wang X, Wang Y, Nguyen P, et al. Evolving 
trends in drug overdose mortality in the USA from 2000 to 2020: an age-
period-cohort analysis. Lancet. 2023;61:102079.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 1 6  / j  . e c  l i 
n  m . 2 0  2 3  . 1 0 2 0 7 9. PMID: 37483548; PMCID: PMC10359729.
Carroll JJ, Green TC, Noonan RK. Evidence-based strategies for preventing 
opioid overdose: what’s working in the United States. Atlanta, GA: Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, 2018.  h t t p  : / /  w w w .  c d  c . g  o v /  d r u g  o v  e r d  o s e  / p d 
f  / p  u b s  / 2 0  1 8 - e  v i  d e n  c e -  b a s e  d -  s t r a t e g i e s . p d f

5.  Davis CS, Carr D. Legal changes to increase access to Naloxone for opioid 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

overdose reversal in the united States. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2015;157:112–
20.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 1 6  / j  . d r  u g a  l c d e  p .  2 0 1 5 . 1 0 . 0 1 3.
Burris S, Norland J, Edlin B. Legal aspects of providing Naloxone to heroin 
users in the united States. Int J Drug Policy. 2001;12(3):237–48.
Seal KH, Downing M, Kral AH, Singleton-Banks S, Hammond JP, Lorvick J, 
Ciccarone D, Edlin BR. Attitudes about prescribing take-home Naloxone 
to injection drug users for the management of heroin overdose: a survey 
of street-recruited injectors in the San Francisco Bay area. J Urban Health. 
2003;80(2):291–301.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 9 3  / j  u r b a n / j t g 0 3 2. PMID: 12791805; 
PMCID: PMC3456285.
Bennett AS, Elliott L. Naloxone’s role in the National opioid crisis-past strug-
gles, current efforts, and future opportunities. Transl Res. 2021;234:43–57.  h t t 
p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 1 6  / j  . t r s l . 2 0 2 1 . 0 3 . 0 0 1. PMID: 33684591; PMCID: PMC8327685.
Szalavitz M. Undoing overdose. Undoing drugs: the untold story of harm 
reduction and the future of addiction. New York, NY: Hachette Books. 
2021;161–72.

10.  Spector AL, Galletly CL, Christenson EA, Montaque HDG, Dickson-Gomez J. 
A qualitative examination of Naloxone access in three States: Connecticut, 
Kentucky, and Wisconsin. BMC Public Health. 2022;22(1):1387.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  
1 0 .  1 1 8 6  / s  1 2 8 8 9 - 0 2 2 - 1 3 7 4 1 - 5. PMID: 35854278; PMCID: PMC9295344.  h t t p  s : /  / 
p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 3 5 8 5 4 2 7 8 /.

11.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Program and Operational Char-

acteristics of Syringe Services Programs in the United States—2020 and 2021. 
National Syringes Services Programs Report 1. Published August 1, 2023.
12.  Lambdin BH, Bluthenthal RN, Wenger LD, et al. Overdose education and 

Naloxone distribution within syringe service Programs – United States, 2019. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69:1117–21.

14. 

13.  Wheeler E, Jones TS, Gilbert MK, Davidson PJ. Centers for disease C. Preven-
tion. Opioid overdose prevention programs providing Naloxone to layper-
sons—United States, 2014. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2015;64(23):631–5.
Javed Z, Burk K, Facente S, Pegram L, Ali A, Asher A. Syringe services 
programs: A technical package of effective strategies and approaches for 
planning, design, and implementation. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health 
and Human Services, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD and TB 
Prevention, Centers for Disease, Control and Prevention. 2020.
Irvine MA, Oller D, Boggis J, Bishop B, Coombs D, Wheeler E, et al. Estimating 
Naloxone need in the USA across Fentanyl, heroin, and prescription opioid 
epidemics: a modelling study. Lancet Public Health. 2022;7(3):e210–8.  h t t p  s : /  / 
d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 1 6  / S  2 4 6 8 - 2 6 6 7 ( 2 1 ) 0 0 3 0 4 - 2.

15. 

16.  Clark AK, Wilder CM, Winstanley EL. A systematic review of community opioid 
overdose prevention and Naloxone distribution programs. J Addict Med. 
2014;8:153–63.

Page 12 of 14

/  / n i d  a .  n i h  . g o  v / r e  s e  a r c  h - t  o p i c  s /  t r e  n d s  - s t a  t i  s t i  c s /  o v e r  d o  s e - d e a t h - r a t e s. August 
21, 2024 Accessed November 6, 2024

23.  Zaza S, Wright-DeAgüero LK, Briss PA, et al. Data collection instrument and 

procedure for systematic reviews in the Guide to Community Preventive 
Services. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2000;18(1 S):44–74
24.  Sanderson S, Tatt ID, Higgins PT. Tools for assessing quality and susceptibil-

ity to bias in observational studies in epidemiology: a systematic review 
and annotates bibliography. International Journal of Epidemiology. 
2007;36:666–676

25.  Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG, Group P. Preferred reporting items 
for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. Int J Surg. 
2010;8(5):336–341

26.  Rando J, Broering D, Olson JE, Marco C, Evans SB. Intranasal naloxone 

administration by police first responders is associated with decreased opioid 
overdose deaths. American Journal of Emergency Medicine. 2015;33(9):1201–
1204.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 1 6  / j  . a j e m . 2 0 1 5 . 0 5 . 0 2 2

27.  Galea S, Worthington N, Piper TM, Nandi VV, Curtis M, Rosenthal DM. Provi-

sion of naloxone to injection drug users as an overdose prevention strategy: 
Early evidence from a pilot study in New York City. Addictive Behaviors. 
2006;31(5):907–912.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 1 6  / j  . a d  d b e  h . 2 0  0 5  . 0 7 . 0 2 0
28.  Strang J, Manning V, Mayet S, Best D, Titherington E, Santana L, et al. Over-

dose training and take-home naloxone for opiate users: prospective cohort 
study of impact on knowledge and attitudes and subsequent management 
of overdoses. Addiction. 2008;103(10):1648–1657

29.  Wagner KD, Valente TW, Casanova M, Partovi SM, Mendenhall BM, Hundley 
JH, et al. Evaluation of an overdose prevention and response training 
programme for injection drug users in the Skid Row area of Los Angeles, CA. 
International Journal of Drug Policy. 2010;21(3):186–193

30.  Yokell MA, Green TC, Bowman S, McKenzie M, Rich JD. Opioid overdose 

prevention and naloxone distribution in Rhode Island. Medicine and health, 
Rhode Island. 2011;94(8):240–242

31.  Williams AV, Marsden J, Strang J. Training family members to manage heroin 
overdose and administer naloxone: Randomized trial of effects on knowl-
edge and attitudes. Addiction. 2014;109(2):250–259.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 1 1 1  / 
a  d d . 1 2 3 6 0

32.  Katzman JG, Takeda MY, Bhatt SR, Moya Balasch M, Greenberg N, Yonas H. 

An innovative model for naloxone use within an OTP Setting: A prospective 
cohort study. Journal of Addiction Medicine. 2018;12(2):113–118.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . 
o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 9 7  / A  D M .  0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0  0 0 0 0 3 7 4

33.  Thylstrup B, Hesse M, Jorgensen M, Thiesen H. One opioid user saving 

another: the first study of an opioid overdose-reversal and naloxone distribu-
tion program addressing hard-to-reach drug scenes in Denmark. Harm 
Reduct J. 2019;16(1):66.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 1 8 6  / s  1 2 9 5 4 - 0 1 9 - 0 3 2 8 - 0. PMID: 
31,805,969. PMCID: PMC6896775.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 1 8 6  / s  1 2 9 5 4 - 0 1 9 - 0 3 2 8 - 0

34.  Naumann RB, Durrance CP, Ranapurwala SI, Proescholdbell S, Childs R, Mar-

shall SW, et al. Impact of a community-based naloxone distribution program 
on opioid overdose death rates. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2019;204:107536.  h t 
t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 1 6  / j  . d r  u g a  l c d e  p .  2 0 1 9 . 0 6 . 0 3 8. PMCID: PMC8107918. PMID: 
31,494,440

35.  Shi L, Lin L. The trim-and-fill method for publication bias: practical guidelines 
and recommendations based on a large database of meta-analyses. Medi-
cine (Baltimore) 2019;98(23):e15987.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 9 7  / M  D . 0  0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0 0  
0 1 5 9 8 7

17.  EMCDDA. Preventing Fatal Overdoses: A Systematic Review of the Effective-

36.  Maxwell S; Bigg D; Stanczykiewicz K; Carlberg-Racich S. Prescribing 

ness of Take-Home Naloxone. 2015.  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . e  m c d  d a .  e u r o  p a  . e u  / p u  b l i c  a t  
i o n  s / e  m c d d  a -  p a p  e r s  / n a l  o x  o n e - e ff  e c t i v e n e s s _ e n

Naloxone to Actively Injecting Heroin Users. Journal of Addictive Diseases, 
2006;25:3,89–96

18.  Mueller SR, Walley AJ, Calcaterra SL, Glanz JM, Binswanger IA. A review of 

opioid overdose prevention and Naloxone prescribing: implications for 
translating community programming into clinical practice. Substance Abuse. 
2015;36(2):240–53.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 8 0  / 0  8 8 9  7 0 7  7 . 2 0  1 5  . 1 0 1 0 0 3 2.
19.  McDonald R, Strang J. Are take-home Naloxone programmes effective? 

Systematic review utilizing application of the Bradford hill criteria. Addiction. 
2016;111:1177–87.

20.  Giglio RE, Li G, DiMaggio CJ. Effectiveness of bystander Naloxone administra-

tion and overdose education programs: a meta-analysis. Injury Epidemiol. 
2015;2:10.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 1 8 6  / s  4 0 6 2 1 - 0 1 5 - 0 0 4 1 - 8.

21.  Razaghizad A, Windle SB, Filion KB, Gore G, Kudrina I, Paraskevopoulos E, et 
al. The effect of overdose education and Naloxone distribution: an umbrella 
review of systematic reviews. AJPH. 2021;111(8):e1–12.

22.  U.S. Overdose Deaths, by Select Drugs or Drug Categories, 1999–2022,  h t t p  s : /  
/ n i d  a .  n i h  . g o  v / s i  t e  s / d  e f a  u l t /  fi   l e s  / i m  a g e s  / fi   g 2 - 2 0 2 4 . j p g. In: NIDA. Drug  O v e r d o 
s e Deaths: Facts and Figures. National Institute on Drug Abuse website.  h t t p  s : 

37.  Walley AY (2013), Xuan ZM, Hackman HH, Quinn E, Doe-Simkins M, Sorensen-
Alawad, A, et al. Opioid overdose rates and implementation of overdose 
education and nasal naloxone distribution in massachusetts: interrupted 
time series analysis. BMJ 2013;346(f174)

38.  Rowe C; Santos GM, Vittinghoff E, Wheeler E, Davidson P, Coffin P. Neigh-

borhood-level and spatial characteristics associated with lay naloxone 
reversal events and opioid overdose deaths. Journal of Urban Health. 
2016;93(1):117 − 30

39.  Bird SM, McAuley A, Parry S, Hunter C. Effectiveness of Scotland’s National 

Naloxone Programme for reducing opioid-related deaths: a before (2006-10) 
versus after (2011-13) comparison. Addiction 2016;111(5):883 − 91.  h t t p  s : /  / o n l  
i n  e l i  b r a  r y . w  i l  e y .  c o m  / d o i  / f  u l l  /  h t t  p s  : / /  d o i  . o r g  / 1  0 . 1 1 1 1 / a d d . 1 3 2 6 5

40.  Bird SM, Strang J, Ashby D, Podmore J, Robertson JR, Welch S, Meade AM, 

Parmar M. External data required timely response by the Trial Steering-Data 
Monitoring Committee for the NALoxone InVEstigation (N-ALIVE) pilot trial. 

Fischer et al. BMC Public Health         (2025) 25:1135 Page 13 of 14

Contemporary Clinical Trials Communications, 2017; Volume 5:100–106. ISSN 
2451–8654,  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 1 6  / j  . c o  n c t  c . 2 0  1 7  . 0 1 . 0 0 6

41.  Rowe C, Wheeler E, Stephen Jones T, Yeh C, Coffin PO. Community-Based 
Response to Fentanyl Overdose Outbreak, San Francisco, 2015. Journal of 
Urban Health 2019;96(1):6–11.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 0 7  / s  1 1 5 2 4 - 0 1 8 - 0 2 5 0 - x. 
PMID: 29,725,887; PMCID: PMC6391290

42.  Koester S, Mueller SR, Raville L, Langegger S, Binswanger IA. Why are some 

people who have received overdose education and naloxone reticent to 
call Emergency Medical Services in the event of overdose? Int J Drug Policy 
2017;48:115–124.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 1 6  / j  . d r  u g p  o . 2 0  1 7  . 0 6 . 0 0 8

43.  Latimore AD, Bergstein RS. “Caught with a body” yet protected by law? Call-
ing 911 for opioid overdose in the context of the Good Samaritan Law. Int J 
Drug Policy 2017;50:82–89

44.  van der Meulen E, Chu SKH, Butler-McPhee J. “That’s why people don’t 

call 911”: Ending routine police attendance at drug overdoses. Int J Drug 
Policy 2021;88:103039.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 1 6  / j  . d r  u g p  o . 2 0  2 0  . 1 0 3 0 3 9. PMID: 
33,227,637

45.  Ashrafioun L, Gamble S, Herrmann M, Baciewicz G. Evaluation of knowledge 

and confidence following opioid overdose prevention training: A compari-
son of types of training participants and naloxone administration methods. 
Subst Abus 2016;37(1):76–81. PMID: 26,514,071.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 8 0  / 0  8 8 9  
7 0 7  7 . 2 0  1 5  . 1 1 1 0 5 5 0

46.  Uyei J, Fiellin DA, Buchelli M, Rodriguez-Santana R, Braithwaite RS. Effects 

of naloxone distribution alone or in combination with addiction treatment 
with or without pre-exposure prophylaxis for HIV prevention in people who 
inject drugs: a cost-effectiveness modeling study. Lancet Public Health. 
2017;2:e133-40

57.  Doe-Simkins M, Wheeler EJ, Figgatt MC, Jones TS, Bell A, Davidson PJ. 

Naloxone Buyers Club: Overlooked Critical Public Health Infrastructure for 
Preventing Overdose Deaths. medRxiv 2021 Nov 14;  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 1 0 1  / 
2  0 2 1  . 1 1  . 1 4 .  2 1  2 6 6 2 2 1. Preprint

58.  Davis CS, Carr D. Over the counter naloxone needed to save lives in the 

United States. Prev Med 2020;130:105932.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 1 6  / j  . y p  m e d  . 2 0 
1  9 .  1 0 5 9 3 2. PMID: 31,770,540

59.  Tabatabai M, Cooper RL, Wilus DM, Edgerton RD, Ramesh A, MacMas-
ter SA, Patel PN, Singh KP. The effect of naloxone access laws on fatal 
synthetic opioid overdose fatality rates. J Prim Care Community Health 
2023;14:21501319221147246.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 1 7 7  / 2  1 5 0 1 3 1 9 2 2 1 1 4 7 2 4 6. 
PMID: 36,625,264; PMCID: PMC9834937

60.  KFF 2018. The actual cost of naloxone is about a nickel. so why is the over-
dose reversal drug priced at over $4,000?. KFF Health News. November 19, 
2018.  h t t p  s : /  / k ff   h e  a l t  h n e  w s . o  r g  / m o  r n i  n g - b  r i  e fi   n g /  m o n d  a y  - n o v e m b e r - 1 9 - 2 0 
1 8 /

61.  Schreiber M. Price for drug that reverses opioid overdoses soars amid record 
deaths. The Guardian Oct 19, 2021.  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . t  h e g  u a r  d i a n  . c  o m /  u s -  n e w s  / 2  
0 2 1  / o c  t / 1 9  / n  a l o  x o n  e - p r  i c  e - s  o a r  s - o p  i o  i d - o v e r d o s e s

62.  Kornfield M. Affordable naloxone is running out, creating a perfect storm for 
more overdose deaths, activists say. The Washington Post. 11 Aug 2021.  h 
t t p  s : /  / w w w  . w  a s h  i n g  t o n p  o s  t . c  o m /  h e a l  t h  / 2 0  2 1 /  0 8 / 1  1 /  n a l o x o n e - d e m a n d / 
Assessed 3 Apr 2023

63.  Mudd A. Naloxone shortage could lead to thousands of overdose deaths. 

UNC Media Hub October 8, 2021.  h t t p  s : /  / m e d  i a  h u b  . u n  c . e d  u /  n a l  o x o  n e - s  h o  r t 
a  g e -  c o u l  d -  l e a  d - t  o - t h  o u  s a n  d s -  o f - o  v e  r d o s e - d e a t h s

64.  Godvin M. The US Faces a Naloxone Shortage at the Worst Possible Time. 

47.  Håkansson A, Alanko Blomé M, Isendahl P, Landgren M, Malmqvist U, Troberg 

Filter. July 29, 2021.  h t t p  s : /  / fi  l  t e  r m a  g . o  r g / u  s -  n a l o x o n e - s h o r t a g e /

K. Distribution of intranasal naloxone to potential opioid overdose bystand-
ers in Sweden: effects on overdose mortality in a full region-wide study. BMJ 
Open. 2024;14(1):e074152.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 1 3 6  / b  m j o  p e n  - 2 0 2  3 -  0 7 4 1 5 2

48.  Gooley B, Weston B, Colella MR, Farkas A. Outcomes of law enforcement 

officer administered naloxone. Am J Emerg Med. 2022;62:25–29.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  
r g /  1 0 .  1 0 1 6  / j  . a j e m . 2 0 2 2 . 0 9 . 0 4 1

49.  Pourtaher E, Payne ER, Fera N, Rowe K, Leung SJ, Stancliff S. Naloxone admin-

istration by law enforcement officers in New York State (2015–2020). Harm 
Reduct J. 2022;19(1):102.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 1 8 6  / s  1 2 9 5 4 - 0 2 2 - 0 0 6 8 2 - w
50.  Drug Enforcement Administration. DEA warns of methamphetamine and 

fentanyl drug marker built by aftermath of COVID-19 in New York. Published 
January 26, 2021. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . d  e a .  g o v  / p r e  s s  - r e  l e a  s e s /  2 0  2 1 /  0 
1 /  2 6 / d  e a  - w a  r n s  - m e t  h a  m p h  e t a  m i n e  - a  n d -  f e n  t a n y  l -  d r u  g - m  a r k e  t -  b u i l t - a f t e r m a 
t h - c o v i d

51.  Weiner J, Murphy SM, Behrends C. Expanding Access to Naloxone: A Review 

65.  Dasgupta N. “Catch up on what’s happening with the naloxone shortage. 

[Infographic].” Nov 3, 2021, 11:06 AM. Tweet.  h t t p  s : /  / t w i  t t  e r .  c o m  / n a b  a r  u n d  / s t  
a t u s  / 1  4 5 5 9 1 4 2 2 3 6 4 1 4 9 7 6 1 0

66.  Wheeler E, Doe-Simkins M. Harm reduction programs distribute one million 
doses of naloxone in 2019. Medium January 2, 2020.  h t t p  s : /  / m e d  i u  m . c  o m /  
@ e j w  h a  r m r  e d u  c t i o  n /  h a r  m - r  e d u c  t i  o n -  p r o  g r a m  s -  d i s  t r i  b u t e  - o  n e -  m i l  l i o n  - d  o s e  
s - o  f - n a  l o  x o n e - i n - 2 0 1 9 - 4 8 8 4 d 3 5 3 5 2 5 6

67.  Yang C, Favaro J, Meacham MC. NEXT Harm Reduction: An Online, Mail-Based 
Naloxone Distribution and Harm-Reduction Program. Am J Public Health 
2021;111(4):667–671.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  2 1 0 5  / a  j p h . 2 0 2 0 . 3 0 6 1 2 4. PMID: 
33,600,254; PMCID: PMC7958031

68.  Remedy Alliance distributes over 1 million doses of naloxone in the first 10 

months of operation. Remedy Alliance. May 10, 2023.  h t t p  s : /  / r e m  e d  y a l  l i a  n c e 
f  t p  . o r  g / b  l o g s  / n  e w s  / r e  m e d y  - a  l l i  a n c  e - f o  r -  t h e  - p e  o p l e  - d  i s t  r i b  u t e s  - o  v e r  - 1 -  m i l l  i o  
n - d  o s e  s - o f  - n  a l o  x o n  e - i n  - t  h e - fi  r s t - 1 0 - m o n t h s - o f - o p e r a t i o n

of Distribution Strategies. Issue Brief. University of Pennsylvania Leonard Davis 
Institute of Health Economics Center for Health Economics of Treatment 
Interventions for Substance Use Disorder, HCV, and HIV. May 29, 2019.  h t t p  s : /  
/ l d i  . u  p e n  n . e  d u / o  u r  - w o  r k /  r e s e  a r  c h -  u p d  a t e s  / e  x p a  n d i  n g - a  c c  e s s  - t o  - n a l  o x  o n e  - a 
-  r e v i  e w  - o f - d i s t r i b u t i o n - s t r a t e g i e s /

69.  FDA (2022). Exemption and Exclusion from Certain Requirements of the Drug 
Supply Chain Security Act for the Distribution of FDA-Approved Naloxone 
Products During the Opioid Public Health Emergency Guidance for Industry. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. September 22, 2022.  h t t p  s : /  / 
w w w  . f  d a .  g o v  / m e d  i a  / 1 6 1 7 5 0 / d o w n l o a d

52.  Townsend T, Blostein F, Doan T, Madson-Olson S, Galecki P, Hutton DW. 

70.  FDA (2023). FDA Approves Second Over-the-Counter Naloxone Nasal Spray 

Cost-effectiveness analysis of alternative naloxone distribution strategies: 
first responder and lay distribution in the United States. Int J Drug Policy. 
2020;75:102536.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 1 6  / j  . d r  u g p  o . 2 0  1 9  . 0 7 . 0 3 1

53.  Zang X, Bessey SE, Krieger MS, Hallowell BD, Koziol JA, Nolen S, Behrends 

CN, Murphy SM, Walley AY, Linas BP, Schackman BR, Marshall BDL. Compar-
ing Projected Fatal Overdose Outcomes and Costs of Strategies to Expand 
Community-Based Distribution of Naloxone in Rhode Island. JAMA Netw 
Open 2022;5(11):e2241174.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 0 1  / j  a m a  n e t  w o r k  o p  e n . 2 0 2 2 . 
4 1 1 7 4
Jawa R, Murray S, Tori M, Bratberg J, Walley A. Federal policymakers should 
urgently and greatly expand 537 naloxone access. Am J Public Health. 
2022;112(4):558–561.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  2 1 0 5  / A  J P H . 2 0 2 1 . 3 0 6 6 9 9. PMID: 538 
35,319,955; PMCID: PMC8961838

54. 

55.  Baker LS, Smith W, Gulley T, Tomann MM. Community perceptions of com-

prehensive harm reduction programs and stigma towards people who inject 
drugs in rural Virginia. J Community Health 2020;45(2):239–244.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r 
g /  1 0 .  1 0 0 7  / s  1 0 9 0 0 - 0 1 9 - 0 0 7 3 2 - 8. PMID: 31,502,098

56.  Schlosser A, Habecker P, Bevins R. Harm reduction in the Heartland: public 
knowledge and beliefs about naloxone in Nebraska, USA. Harm Reduct J 
2022;19(1):22.  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 1 8 6  / s  1 2 9 5 4 - 0 2 2 - 0 0 6 0 6 - 8. PMID: 35,246,153; 
PMCID: PMC8894827

Product. FDA News Release. 28 July 2023.  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . f  d a .  g o v  / n e w  s -  e v e  n t s  / 
p r e  s s  - a n  n o u  n c e m  e n  t s /  f d a  - a p p  r o  v e s  - s e  c o n d  - o  v e r  - c o  u n t e  r -  n a l  o x o  n e - n  a s  a l - s 
p r a y - p r o d u c t

71.  Harm Reduction Therapeutics (HRT), Inc. A 501(c)(3) non-profit pharmaceuti-
cal company whose mission is to prevent opioid overdose deaths by making 
free or low-cost over-the-counter naloxone available to everyone across the 
United States.  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . h  a r m  r e d  u c t i  o n  t h e r a p e u t i c s . o r g

72.  Harm Reduction Therapeutics (HRT). FDA approval of RiVIVE™ is a critical 

milestone in making emergency treatment of opioid overdose more widely 
available (Press Release). 28 July 2023.  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . h  a r m  r e d  u c t i  o n  t h e  r a p  e u t i  
c s  . o r  g / w  p - c o  n t  e n t  / u p  l o a d  s /  2 0 2  3 / 0  8 / H R  T -  R i V  i v e  - P r e  s s  - R e  l e a  s e - J  u l  y - 2 8 - F I N A L 
_ D A T E D . p d f

73.  White House Releases State Model Law to Help Make Access to Naloxone 

Consistent Across the Country. November 17, 2021.  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . w  h i t  e h o  u s e 
.  g o  v / o  n d c  p / b r  i e  fi  n  g - r  o o m /  2 0  2 1 /  1 1 /  1 7 / w  h i  t e -  h o u  s e - r  e l  e a s  e s -  s t a t  e -  m o d  e l -  l a 
w -  t o  - h e  l p -  m a k e  - a  c c e  s s -  t o - n  a l  o x o  n e -  c o n s  i s  t e n t - a c r o s s - t h e - c o u n t r y /
74.  Facher L. Biden drug czar to summon naloxone makers to White House to 

discuss pricing. STAT May 16, 2023.  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . s  t a t  n e w  s . c o  m /  2 0 2  3 / 0  5 / 1 6  / n  
a r c  a n -  n a l o  x o  n e -  m a k  e r s -  d r  u g - c z a r - p r i c i n g /

Fischer et al. BMC Public Health         (2025) 25:1135 75.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Overdose Data to Action. August 

9, 2023  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . c  d c .  g o v  / d r u  g o  v e r  d o s  e / o d  2 a  / i n d e x . h t m l

76.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Stop Overdose. September 15, 

2022  h t t p s :   /  / w w  w .  c d  c  . g  o  v / s  t o  p o v  e r d o   s e /  i n   d e x . h t m l

Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Page 14 of 14

Fischer et al. BMC Public Health         (2025) 25:1135
