---
pmid: 40317037
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/40317037
title: Sports nutrition knowledge, source of nutrition information and dietary consumption pattern of Ugandan endurance athletes - a cross-sectional study of the Sebei sub-region.
---

Musau et al. BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation          (2025) 17:110 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13102-025-01157-8

BMC Sports Science, Medicine 
and Rehabilitation

Sports nutrition knowledge, source 
of nutrition information and dietary 
consumption pattern of Ugandan endurance 
athletes: a cross-sectional study of the Sebei 
sub-region

Joshua Musau1,2*

, Oluyemisi F. Folasire3,4

 and Nonhlanhla S. Mkumbuzi5,6,7,8

Abstract
Background  Athletes’ nutrition knowledge depends on the sources of nutrition information they are exposed to 
and their social status. Currently, there is a dearth of literature on the nutrition knowledge of Ugandan athletes. This 
study assessed endurance athletes’ sports nutrition knowledge, sources of nutrition information, and their dietary 
consumption patterns.

Methods  A cross-sectional descriptive study including 100 purposively selected (middle and long distance) 
athletes from four Athletic Management camps was conducted in Kapchorwa district, Uganda. Using an interviewer-
administered questionnaire, trained research assistants collected athletes’ demographic information, knowledge, 
practices, sources of nutrition information and consumption patterns. ANOVA, Independent t-test, Chi-square analysis, 
and Binary logistic analyses were done using SPSS® software version 23.0.

Results  Most athletes n = 74 (74.0%) in this study were aged between 15 and 17 years with at least 2 years’ 
experience in athletics. Majority n = 68 (68.0%) of the athletes had good sports nutrition knowledge while n = 32 
(32.0%) showed poor knowledge. About n = 88 (88.0%) knew that vitamin consumption can enhance recovery 
after training. Athletic trainers n = 49 (49.0%) and family/parents n = 28 (28.0%) were primary sources of nutrition 
information, while nutritionists/dietitians n = 5 (5.0%) and the internet n = 4 (4.0%) were less consulted. Cereals 
were the most consumed food group n = 72 (72.0%), followed by legumes and nuts n = 67 (67.0%) while the least 
consumed foods were milk/egg n = 33 (33.0%)), fish n = 25 (25.0%) and meat/poultry n = 13 (13.0%). Good sports 
nutrition knowledge was associated with adequate dietary practices (p = 0.009). Sports nutrition knowledge differed 
significantly with age group (F = 4.566, p = 0.013), and between female and male (F = 21.884, p < 0.000) athletes. Age 
group was a significant predictor (β = 1.925, Ex(β) = 6.853, C. I = 0.882–36.096, p = 0.023) of sports nutrition knowledge.

*Correspondence:
Joshua Musau
musaujoshua2017@gmail.com

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

© The Author(s) 2025. Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, 
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and 
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included 
in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit  h t t p  : / /  c r e a  t i  v e c  o m m  o n s .  o r  g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 /.

RESEARCHOpen AccessPage 2 of 13

Conclusions  In this study endurance athletes had good sports nutrition knowledge, and relied primarily on their 
coaches/trainers for sports nutrition information. It is recommended that athletic trainers be offered supplementary 
training in sports nutrition to ensure proper nutrition knowledge dissemination among athletes.

Keywords  Athlete, Nutrition, Sports, Knowledge, Endurance, African athletes

Introduction
Nutritional  intake  for  athletes  is  an  important  part  of 
their  adequate  nourishment  and  well-being  [1].  Nutri-
tion is a key component in improving an athlete’s adapta-
tion to endurance training and its effects [2]. Endurance 
activities  require  extreme  physical  and  mental  strength 
from  an  athlete  and  such  events  include  those  lasting 
approximately 26 min to about 4 h [2]. These events are 
often  associated  with  a  high  turnover  of  nutrients,  con-
sequently  predisposing  endurance  athletes  to  a  risk  of 
nutrient  depletion  on  the  field  of  play  [3].  Sports  nutri-
tion  guidelines  recommend  macronutrient  intake  of 
about  45-65%  carbohydrates,  20-35%  fat,  and  10-30% 
protein in their meals supplemented with micronutrients 
like vitamins C and D and Iron in deficiency cases [1, 2, 
4],  but  Proper  use  of  nutrition  strategies  and  consump-
tion of the right food quantities for the appropriate nutri-
ents  requires  that  athletes  be  knowledgeable  on  sports 
nutrition.

Sports  nutrition  knowledge  (SNK)  is  an  individual’s 
understanding  of  concepts  that  relate  to  how  to  main-
tain  a  healthy  body  mass;  manage  body  fluid  balance; 
and  fuelling  techniques  before,  during,  and  after  train-
ing  or  competition;  supplement  use;  and  knowledge  of 
nutrition  for  athletic  performance  [5].  Nutrition  educa-
tion interventions on athlete populations report positive 
impacts on athletes’ sports nutrition knowledge and atti-
tudes toward nutrition [6, 7]. However, SNK can also be 
influenced by ones’ social status: income level, education 
level, and SNK can also vary with age and sex of an indi-
vidual [8–12]. Sex as a biological factor dictates the food 
intake,  energy,  nutrient  requirements,  and  metabolism 
resulting in uneven health outcomes between males and 
females  [13–15].  Generally,  females  are  always  mindful 
of their body image as compared to males and are more 
likely  to  seek  nutrition  knowledge  and  counselling  [16]. 
Reports  from  athletes  and  non-athlete  populations  give 
evidence of positive dietary changes associated with high 
nutrition knowledge scores [17, 18]. This is corroborated 
by  a  recent  research  on  24-hour  ultramarathon  athletes 
reported positive dietary changes among those who had 
high  knowledge  scores  [19].  This  implies  that  dietary 
practices  based  on  limited  knowledge  and  misconcep-
tions  can  negatively  impact  health  and,  eventually  ath-
letic performance [11].

Data  on  elite  African  athletes’  sports  nutrition  knowl-
edge  especially  in  Uganda  are  generally  scarce.  How-
ever, some data are available for Kenyan elite endurance 

athletes,  Ugandan  recreational  athletes,  and  Ugandan 
university  athletes.  These  data  shows  that  athletes  have 
poor  nutrition  knowledge  of  supplementation  and  that 
their sources of nutrition information are often not cred-
ible  [20–22].  Additionally,  these  athletes  rarely  consult 
with  registered  dietitians  or  sports  nutritionists  [22], 
which  may  further  predispose  them  to  misinformation 
and associated health risks [20].

Despite  the  elite  level  at  which  Ugandan  endurance 
athletes compete and their successes at this level, sports 
nutrition  knowledge,  sources  of  nutrition  information, 
and  dietary  consumption  patterns  (DCP)  of  Ugandan 
endurance athletes remain unclear. Therefore, this study 
sought to investigate sports nutrition knowledge, sources 
of  nutrition  information,  and  dietary  consumption  pat-
terns  of  endurance  athletes  in  the  Sebei  sub-region  of 
Uganda.

Methods and materials
Study design

A  cross-sectional,  descriptive  study  of  Ugandan  endur-
ance athletes in the Sebei sub-region of Uganda.

Study site

This  study  was  conducted  in  the  Eastern  region  of 
Uganda which for years has produced the most dominant 
athletes on the global scene, especially in distance events 
with  the  10,000  m  world  records  claimed  in  the  Tokyo 
Olympic Games 2020, and the Budapest World Champi-
onship 2023 [23].

This region hosts the Ugandan National High Altitude 
Training  Centre  (NHATC)  situated  2,550  m  above  sea 
level and where the majority of Ugandan endurance ath-
letes train [24].

Population

The  study  population  was  approximately  10,000  athletes 
in the Sebei sub-region; namely, Kapchorwa, Kween, and 
Bukwo Districts.

Sampling and sample size

A purposive sampling technique was used to select Kap-
chorwa  among  three  [3]  sporting  districts  and  four  [4] 
athletic  management  camps  in  Kapchorwa;  and  a  prag-
matic purposive approach to select 100 male and female 
athletes  as  study  participants.  The  participants  selected 
were middle-distance and long-distance athletes.

Musau et al. BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation          (2025) 17:110 Page 3 of 13

The  minimum  required  sample  for  the  study  was 
determined by Yamane’s formulae [25] and calculated as 
below.

n = N/(1 + N(x)2)

Whereby  n = Sample  size,  N = Total  population,  x = Level 
of Precision, 1 = constant, N = 10,000 athletes, x = 10%.

n = 10,000/ (1+(10,000(1/100)).
n = 99.009,  n = 99.09  which 

respondents.

is  approximately  100 

The calculated minimum required sample size was 100 

athletes at a priori alpha level of 0.05.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria

Ugandan  Middle  and  long-distance  athletes  aged  15–35 
who  had  been  actively  training  within  the  camps  were 
recruited for this study. Sick athletes, and those athletes 
who resided out of camps where they received extra per-
sonalized training were not included in our study.

Data collection

Data  were  collected  between  October  and  November 
2023  and  this  involved  100  endurance  athletes:  n = 31 
(31.0%)  females  and  n = 69  (69.0%)  males.  Master’s  level 
trained  research  assistants  used  an  adapted  SNK  ques-
tionnaire  from  Folasire  et  al.,  [26]  to  assess  athletes’ 
sports  nutrition  knowledge  in  their  training  camps. The 
questionnaire had 48 questions in total: on demographics 
(8 items), sports nutrition knowledge (15 items), dietary 
practices (15 items), and sources of nutrition information 
(3 items). A semi-quantitative Food Frequency Question-
naire  (7  items)  assessed  the  dietary  consumption  pat-
terns (DCP), and food charts of locally consumed foods 
in this region were displayed to help participants to recall 
food  consumed  from  different  groups.  Responses  were 
recorded  as  TRUE/FALSE  for  sports  nutrition  knowl-
edge  questions  and  nutrition  practice  questions  while 
YES/NO  for  other  sections.  Only  two  questions  1  and 
15  required  a  participant  to  note  down  their  responses 
for the sports nutrition knowledge section. For the FFQ, 
responses  were  chosen  in  the  order  of  consuming  from 
a particular food group 1 and 2 times daily, 1–3 and 4–6 
times a weekly.

On pilot testing, the questionnaire took approximately 
eight  [8]  minutes  per  athlete.  The  questionnaire  in  the 
current study obtained a Cronbach alpha of 0.74, compa-
rable to that reported by the designer [26].

Human ethics and consent to participate

All  participants  were  pledged  anonymity  and  confi-
dentiality  of  the  data  collected.  Informed  consent  was 
obtained  from  each  participant  above  consenting  age 
while for those under 18 years old, their parents and legal 

guardians gave informed consent for participation in our 
study.  This  was  done  after  giving  an  explanation  of  our 
study  objectives  and  answering  all  questions  from  the 
participants and guardians regarding the study.

Data analysis and management

Quantitative data were entered into Microsoft Excel® ver-
sion  2016  (Microsoft  Corporation)  and  were  analysed 
using  SPSS  software  version  23.0  (Chicago,  SPSS  Inc). 
Data  were  reported  as  percentages,  means,  frequencies, 
and  statistics  of  inference  such  as  One-way  analysis  of 
variance  (ANOVA),  Logistic  regression,  and  Chi-square 
were performed on the data.

All  correct  responses  of  respondents  were  summed, 
and  an  average  was  computed  to  determine  scores  for 
the  participants’  sports  nutrition  knowledge  and  prac-
tice.  The  overall  score  was  determined  by  summing  all 
correctly answered question items. The correct scores for 
all of the sports nutrition knowledge items were summed 
for  individual  responses  and  used  to  calculate  the  mean 
(M = 24.83 ± 1.881).  A  percentage  was  generated  from 
the scores, classification of respondents done was differ-
entiating those that scored below (poor knowledge) and 
above the average score (good knowledge).

For  Dietary  consumption  patterns  (DCP)  of  the 
respondents,  responses  from  the  FFQ  were  classified  as 
Frequent; for food groups consumed 1 and 2 times daily 
and infrequent; for those food groups consumed 1–3 and 
4–6 times in a week.

Chi-square analyses were performed to ascertain possi-
ble relationships between variables of interest, e.g., nutri-
tion  knowledge  categories  with  dietary  consumption 
patterns (DCP), and also to establish relationships exist-
ing  between  nutrition  knowledge  categories  and  dietary 
practices and demographic information of the athletes.

One  way-analysis  of  variance  (ANOVA)  was  used 
to  test  the  variation  of  the  sports  nutrition  knowledge 
among  different  age  groups  and  competition  levels  of 
athletes.  An  independent  student  t-test  was  tested  to 
identify possible differences in knowledge scores for the 
sex  and  income  categories  of  the  respondents.  Logis-
tic  regression  analysis  was  performed  to  identify  which 
independent  variable  was  the  best  predictor  for  nutri-
tion  knowledge  among  the  athlete  population.  Signifi-
cant  socio-economic  variables  were  coded  as  dummy 
variables  computed  and  ran  in  the  model  and  the  most 
significant with close to p = 0.00 was considered the best 
predictor of knowledge. The significance level was set at 
p < 0.05.

Results
Social-demographic information

Of  the  100  participants,  n = 31  (31.0%)  were  female  and 
n = 69  (69.0%)  were  male.  The  largest  proportion  n = 75 

Musau et al. BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation          (2025) 17:110  
(75.0%)  of  athletes  were  aged  between  15  and  17  years 
while  the  least  number  n = 12  (12.0%)  was  from  the  age 
category 25–35 years.

The  highest  level  of  education  attained  by  n = 54 
(54.0%) was secondary school, followed by n = 43 (43.0%) 
who attained primary school level of education and only 
n = 3 (3.0%) of athletes reported in this study had attained 
tertiary-level  education.  All  n = 100  (100.0%)  of  respon-
dents lived in rural areas (villages).

There  were  twice  as  many  middle-distance  n = 67 
(67.0%)  compared  to  long-distance  n = 33  (33.0%)  ath-
letes.  The  majority  n = 79  (79.0%)  of  the  respondents 
reported  having  a  monthly  family  income  of  less  than 
Uganda  Shillings  (UGX)  130,000  while  only  n = 21 
(21.0%)  earned  more  than  Uganda  Shillings  (UGX) 
130,000 monthly as seen in Supplementary Table 1.

Sports nutrition knowledge scores

Most n = 68 (68.0%) of the athletes scored above the aver-
age  score  (M = 24.83 ± 1.881),  and  had  good  knowledge 
scores  on  sports  nutrition  while  n = 32  (32.0%)  of  the 
respondents  had  scores  less  than  the  average  and  hence 
classified  as  having  poor  knowledge  of  sports  nutrition. 

Table 1  Sports nutrition knowledge (SNK) among Ugandan 
endurance athletes from the Sebei sub-region (N = 100)
Questions

1) How many times should we eat in a day?
2) Do you think foods rich in carbohydrates are the 
main sources of energy in the body?
3) As an athlete, my food intake should increase
4) Can the lack of iron in the diet result in fatigue, 
injury, and illness?
5) Do you think sports drinks are the best to 
replace body fluids lost on the field of play?
6) Are vitamins good sources of energy?

7) Alcohol consumption can negatively affect the 
absorption and utilization of nutrients?
8) Eating of snacks is as good as eating home-
prepared foods?
9) Do you think foods rich in sugar, jam and honey 
are suitable sources of energy for athletes?
10) The last meal before a competition should be 
consumed at least 3 h before a competition
11) Males and females of the same group use up 
the same amount of energy during exercise
12) Fruits and vegetables are important sources of 
vitamins and minerals?
13) Vitamins can enhance recovery after 
competition
14) Do you think milk and milk products are good 
sources of calcium?
15) How many classes of nutrients do we have?

Correct
n (%)

Incor-
rect
n (%)
3(3.0)
100 (100.0) 0 (0.0)

97 (97.0)

62 (62.0)

86 (86.0)

95 (95.0) 5 (5.0)
70 (70.0)

30 
(30.0)
38 
(38.0)
14 
(14.0)
76 
(76.0)
68 
(68.0)
93 (93.0) 7 (7.0)

24 (24.0)

32 (32.0)

57 (57.0)

43 (43.0)

89 (89.0)

88 (88.0)

82 (82.0)

42 (42.0)

43 
(43.0)
57 
(57.0)
11 
(11.0)
12 
(12.0)
18 
(18.0)
58 
(58.0)

Page 4 of 13

Similarly,  n = 44  (44.0%)  of  athletes  had  inadequate 
dietary  practices  with  their  nutrition  practice  score 
below  the  average  score  (M = 20.34 ± 1.130),  while  n = 56 
(56.0%) had scores above the mean with adequate dietary 
practices.

Sports nutrition knowledge

Most respondents n = 97 (97.0%) knew that we should eat 
at least three [3] times in a day while n = 3(3.0%) did not 
answer  correctly.  Only,  n = 42(42.0%)  our  athletes  knew 
the  six  classes  of  nutrients  while  the  rest  did  not  know. 
With  regards  to  sources  of  energy,  all  n = 100  (100.0%) 
of the athletes knew that foods rich in carbohydrates are 
the main source of energy for the body. Nearly all n = 95 
(95.0%) of the respondents had the right knowledge that 
as  an  athlete,  food  consumption  should  be  higher  than 
compared to the general population. The knowledge that 
iron deficiency in the diet can cause fatigue, illness, and 
injury  was  known  by  at  least  n = 70  (70.0%)  while  n = 30 
(30.0%)  were  not  knowledgeable.  About  n = 62  (62.0%) 
of athletes knew that sports drinks more likely aid rehy-
dration  when  body  fluids  are  lost  in  the  field  of  compe-
tition;  n = 86  (86.0%)  knew  that  vitamins  are  not  a  good 
source of energy; n = 76 (76.0%) had good knowledge that 
drinking  alcohol  affects  digestion.  Slightly  more  than 
half  n = 57  (57.0%)  of  the  athletes  knew  that  a  pre-event 
meal  should  be  consumed  at  least  3  h  before  the  event. 
The majority of the athletes n = 88 (88.0%) responded cor-
rectly to the statement that vitamins can enhance recov-
ery  after  competition.  A  detailed  summary  is  in  Table  1 
above.

Dietary practices

The  study  also  found  that  n = 64  (64.0%)  of  the  athletes 
had adequate Dietary Practices (DP) with score above the 
average  DP  score  (M = 20.34 ± 1.13),  while  n = 36  (36.0%) 
had scores less than the average score and these partici-
pants had inadequate Dietary Practices (DP).

Table  2  below  shows  that  n = 27(27.0%)  of  the  endur-
ance athletes in this study use supplements such as mul-
tivitamins, while n = 73 (73.0%) do not. Most respondents 
n = 97 (97.0%) consume fruits and vegetables often while 
n = 3 (3.0%) do not; n = 36 (36.0%) skipped the pre-event 
meal  while  n = 64  (64.0%)  of  them  did  not  skip  the  pre-
event meal.

Dietary consumption pattern

Most  athletes  n = 77  (77.0%)  frequently  consumed  from 
the cereal food group (e.g., posho, rice, wheat, sorghum, 
millet),  n = 72  (72.0%)  consumed  from  legumes/nuts 
group  (e.g.,  groundnuts,  sunflower  seed,  pumpkin  seed, 
bean/soya  seed),  n = 55  (55.0%)  consumed  from  vegeta-
bles/fruits  group,  (e.g.,  watermelon,  Mbogoya,  orange, 
mangoes,  cabbage,  Sukuma  wiki,  Suja),  while  n = 46 

Musau et al. BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation          (2025) 17:110 Page 5 of 13

Table 2  Dietary practices (DP) among Ugandan endurance 
athletes from the Sebei sub-region (N = 100)
Yes
Questions
% (n)

No
%(n)

1) Do you use supplements like multivitamin 
as an athlete?
2) I consume lots of fruits and vegetables
3) I skip meals before a competition or an 
event
4) I eat just before an event
5) I eat just after an event
6) I consume sports drinks every day during 
practice or when I feel dehydrated
7) I eat an adequate diet daily
8) I change my pattern of eating at the time 
of a competition
9) I always take my breakfast daily
10) I consume lots of water during and after 
training/competition
11) I always eat at least one hour before 
training/competition
12) I prefer snacks to a special diet before 
training and competition
13) I eat at least three times daily
14) I consume milk and milk products daily
15) I consume alcohol to enhance my 
performance

27 (27.0)

73 (73.0)

97 (97.0)
36 (36.0)

3 (3.0)
64 (64.0)

63 (63.0)
84 (84.0)
49 (49.0)

37 (37.0)
16 (16.0)
51 (51.0)

88 (88.0)
90 (90.0)

12 (12.0)
10 (10.0)

97 (97.0)
100(100.0)

3 (3.0)
0 (0.0)

46 (46.0)

54 (54.0)

42 (42.0)

58 (58.0)

100(100.0)
48 (48.0)
0 (0.0)

0 (0.0)
52 (52.0)
100(100.0)

(46.0%) consumed from root/tubers group. The least con-
sumed  food  groups  were  milk/egg  n = 33  (33.0%),  fish/
Mukene  n = 25  (25.0%)  and  meat/poultry  n = 13  (13.0%) 
as seen in Fig. 1 below.

As  shown  in  Fig.  2  below,  athletic  trainers  n = 49 
(49.0%),  parents/family  n = 28  (28.0%),  others  (doctors, 
peers,  school)  n = 6  (6.0%),  nutritionists/dietitians  n = 5 
(5.0%),  magazines  n = 4  (4.0%),  TV/Radio  n = 4  (4.0%) 
and the internet n = 4 (4.0%) were consulted for nutrition 
information. Only n = 9 (9.0%) of participants had previ-
ously undertaken a nutrition course.

Sports nutrition knowledge and other variables

There  was  a  significant  relationship  between  SNK  and 
athletes’  family  monthly  income  (p = 0.003),  relation-
ship status (p = 0.033), age group (p = 0.001), and athletic 
event (p = 0.038), but not with the highest level of educa-
tion (p = 0.481), sex of athlete (p = 0.176), and with num-
ber years of participation in athletics (p = 0.272). Table 3 
above shows a summary of the results.

Age  was  the  best  predictor  for  SNK  (p = 0.023; 
C.I = 0.882–36.096).  For  every  unit  (1.925)  increase  in 
age,  an  athlete’s  odds  of  being  classified  as  knowledge-
able  were  nearly  seven  (6.9)  times.  The  model  with  all 
the  significant  socio-demographic  variables  accurately 

Fig. 1  Dietary consumption frequency of Ugandan endurance athletes from the Sebei sub-region (N = 100)
Dietary consumption pattern

Musau et al. BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation          (2025) 17:110  
Page 6 of 13

Fig. 2  Sources of nutrition information among Ugandan endurance athletes from the Sebei sub-region (N = 100)
Sources of nutrition information

predicted  those  with  good  knowledge  85.0%  of  the  time 
as seen in Table 4 above.

differ with athletes’ relationship status (p = 0.746) results 
in Table 6 below.

SNK  was  significantly  associated  with  root  tuber  con-
sumption  (p < 0.05)  but  not  with  the  rest  of  the  food 
groups shown in Supplementary Tables 2 and there were 
no  associations  observed  between  SNK  and  sources 
of  nutrition  information.  Also,  having  had  a  nutrition 
course previously did not correlate with nutrition knowl-
edge (p = 0.159). All results are shown in Supplementary 
Table 3. Additionally, good SNK was significantly associ-
ated with adequate dietary practices (p = 0.009) as shown 
below in Table 5.

SNK  was  different  between  athletes  of  different  sex 
(p < 0.000),  with  different  respondents’  family  income 
levels (p = 0.018), with different athletic events (p < 0.05), 
with  different  age  groups  (p = 0.013),  and  with  different 
education levels of respondents (p = 0.024). SNK did not 

Discussion
From the findings, it is noted that male respondents con-
stituted a bigger proportion than females. This is because 
generally, sports is strongly gendered in African settings 
and society tends to discourage females from participat-
ing in sports [27]. Our findings relate to a previous study 
by Baranauskas et al. [28], where male athletes were more 
than female athletes. The general trend of low participa-
tion of females in sports remains high, and this calls for 
strategies  to  accommodate  more  females  in  sports,  for 
the case of our study incorporation of female sports staff 
(e.g.  Coaches,  Physiotherapists,  and  managers)  could  be 
a way to attract more females to sports. Additionally, we 
showed knowledge differences between the sexes, which 
differs from other studies such as Magee et al. [29],. Our 

Musau et al. BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation          (2025) 17:110  
Table 3  Relationship between socio-demographic variables and 
SNK of Ugandan endurance athletes (N = 100)
Variable

Sports Nutrition 
Knowledge (SNK)
Poor
Good
n (%)
n (%)
44(44.0)
25(25.0)
24(24.0)
7(7.0)
43(43.0)
31(31.0)
14(14.0)
1(1.0)
11(11.0)
1(1.0)
41(41.0)
26(26.0)
27(27.0)
6(6.0)

Chi-
square
(x2)

P 
value

1.832

0.176

13.005

0.001**

4.322

0.038*

19(19.0)
11(11.0)
2(2.0)
23(23.0)
5(5.0)
3(3.0)
1(1.0)
14(14.0)
18(18.0)
0(0.0)

41(41.0)
16(16.0)
11(11.0)
45(45.0)
15(15.0)
0(0.0)
8(8.0)
29(29.0)
36(36.0)
3(3.0)

48(48.0)
20(20.0)

2.600

0.272

8.734

0.033*

1.462

0.481

9.063

0.003**

Male
Female
15–17
18–25
26–35
Middle 
distance
Long 
distance
1–2
3–5
> 5
Single
Married
Co-habiting
Divorced
Primary
Secondary
Tertiary

Self-report-
ed sex
Age at 
recruitment

Athletic 
event

Duration of 
participation 
in athletics
Relationship 
status

The highest 
level of 
education 
attained
Monthly 
family in-
come (UGX)

0-130,000
> 131,000

31(31.0)
1(1.0)

Table 4  Binary logistic analysis of significant socio-demographic 
variables of Ugandan athletes
Variable

Ex(β)

Β

P

Age group
Athletic event
Relationship status
Monthly family income

1.925
1.233
-0.880
2.010

6.853
3.431
0.415
7.461

0.023*
0.059
0.047*
0.065

C.I (95%)
Lower
0.882
0.956
0.174
0.882

Upper
36.096
12.317
0.989
63.144

observed sports nutrition knowledge differences with sex 
could be because female adolescents are generally aware 
of  their  body  image  and  tend  to  seek  nutritional  coun-
selling more than their male counterparts [16]. This also 

Page 7 of 13

implies that there may be a need to provide sex-specific 
nutrition knowledge enhancement to athletes to accom-
modate this sex difference with more emphasis on male 
endurance athletes.

The  majority  of  endurance  athletes  in  this  study  were 
late adolescents and had participated for less than 2 years 
in athletics. This is similar to the cohort from Baranaus-
kas et al., [28] whose respondents had a mean age of 17 
years,  but  contrasts  with  a  previous  study  conducted 
among Kenyan endurance athletes who were much older 
with  the  majority  between  23  and  28  years  of  age  with 
less  than  3  years  of  participation,  which  is  somewhat 
similar to our study findings [21]. The differences in age 
in our study, can be explained by the implementation of 
talent  identification  and  development  programs  where 
athletes are sourced right from the primary school level 
and  offered  free  welfare  and  training  in  camps.  Unlike 
other  countries  like  in  Kenya  where  talent  identification 
is still not fully implemented, we can observe more older 
athletes reported in their studies. Other studies reporting 
more  older  athletes  could  be  a  result  of  recruitment  of 
professional athletes in their studies who have more years 
of experience.

The  highest  level  of  education  attained  by  most  ath-
letes  in  our  study  was  secondary  school  level,  which  is 
expected  given  their  age  and  generally,  such  education 
levels  are  commonly  reported  in  studies  of  Kenyan  and 
Ugandan athletes [20, 21]. In Uganda, talent is seen as a 
source  of  livelihood  and  athletes  who  excel  in  athletics 
at early age tend to drop out of school not only because 
of  underlying  financial  constraints  but  to  focus  more  of 
their  time  on  athletic  training  and  competitions  to  earn 
income to support their families and siblings.

Our  results  showed  differences  in  sports  nutrition 
knowledge  amongst  athletes  of  different  education  lev-
els. However, level of education has been associated with 
the SNK in other studies of physically active individuals 
[20, 21] and in our cohort may have implications for the 
development of future education materials, as these need 
to be tailored to the level of education of our cohort. Also, 

Table 5  SNK and DP score category and bivariate analysis for SNK and DP of Ugandan endurance athletes (N = 100)
Variable

Category

Poor
Good
Poor
Good

SNK

DP

Bivariate analysis

DP

Poor
Good

*Significant at p < 0.05

Respondents score
n
32
68
44
56

%
32.0
68.0
44.0
56.0

SNK

Poor
8
24

Good
36
32

x2
6.895

df

1

p

0.009*

Musau et al. BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation          (2025) 17:110 Table 6  Independent t-test analysis and ANOVA- analysis to determine variation in SNK within Ugandan athletes’ demographic 
(N = 100)
Variables
Sex

F
21.884

t
-1.067

Male
Female
Low
High
Middle distance
Long distance

Mean
24.70
25.13
24.58
25.76
24.81
24.88

SD
2.198
0.763
1.952
1.221
2.210
0.927

5.750

-2.630

21.601

− 0.181

df
2
3
2

F
4.566
0.411
3.874

P
0.013
0.746
0.024

Family monthly income

Athletic event

ANOVA-analysis
Variable
Age group
Relationship status
Education Level

Page 8 of 13

P
0.000

0.018

0.000

age  and  athletic  category  had  a  relationship  with  SNK 
which  was  not  observed  in  a  cohort  of  Kenyan  endur-
ance  athletes  [21].  Elsewhere,  age  had  been  reported  to 
have a relationship with sports nutrition knowledge [30, 
31]. This explains the fact that, younger athletes may have 
lesser experiences and maturity unlike their older coun-
terpart who are more likely to have higher sports knowl-
edge acquired over the years of competition and training. 
Athletic  category  of  our  cohort  related  with  SNK,  simi-
larly  to  Burke  et  al.,  [2]  they  report  that  every  athletic 
event comes with different nutritional needs. This implies 
that our athletes should receive tailored sports nutrition 
knowledge  according  to  the  athletic  categories  and  not 
generic concepts.

The  study  found  that  most  athletes  had  good  dietary 
practices and were knowledgeable about when to eat and 
what to eat before and after training or competitions but 
a significant proportion of them didn’t know about the six 
classes  of  nutrients. This  is  similar  to  a  study  on  under-
graduate athletes from Nigeria where 63% of respondents 
reported  adequate  nutrition  practices  [26],  as  well  as  a 
study  on  Nepali  athletes  where  50%  had  good  nutrition 
practice  scores  [31].  Female  athletes  displayed  better 
dietary practices compared to males in the current study 
just as was observed in Koch et al.’s study of the Nemonit 
population  [10].  Females  generally  are  so  prudent  when 
it  comes  to  what  they  eat,  to  keep  tract  of  their  body 
weight and sometimes adopt restrictive diets unlike their 
male  counterparts.  Since  our  endurance  athlete’s  nutri-
ent requirements are usually greater than those of normal 
populations, females should be given special attention to 
avert  the  risk  of  Reduced  energy  deficiency  (RED)  and 
other common micronutrient deficiencies like Iron.

Almost  75%  of  the  athletes  did  not  skip  meals  while 
almost every athlete always ate their breakfast, as shown 
in  other  cohorts  [32].  All  respondents  in  this  cohort 
take a lot of water during training and eat at least three 
meals  a  day.  This  is  consistent  with  the  findings  of  pre-
vious  studies  on  in-training  water  consumption  [26,  32] 
but contrasts with Oladunni & Sanusi [33], who reported 

that  77%  of  athletes  from  Nigeria  skip  meals.  The  pres-
ent  findings  also  concur  with  the  findings  of  Folasire  et 
al., [26], which reported that 82.7% of athletes ate a pre-
event  meal  at  least  three  hours  before  the  event;  57% 
agreed  that  athletes’  food  intake  should  be  higher  than 
non-athletes;  63.6%  reported  good  knowledge  of  the  six 
classes of nutrients.

Further,  athletes  in  our  study  displayed  a  high  level  of 
sports  nutrition  knowledge  when  it  came  to  the  use  of 
recovery  strategies  with  75%  of  endurance  athletes  hav-
ing  good  knowledge  of  the  consumption  of  vitamins 
to  enhance  recovery.  This  finding  was  corroborated  by 
studies  that  show  that  vitamin  intake  enhances  muscle 
recovery  by  negating  the  effects  of  exercise-induced 
muscle  damage  [34,  35].  Such  recovery  strategies  could 
be adopted by endurance athletes following this position 
statement  [2].  The  present  results  are  also  corroborated 
by  previous  studies  that  report  good  sports  nutrition 
knowledge  in  56%  of  Kenyan  endurance  athletes  and 
69.42%  of  Ghanaian  athletes  [21,  36].  However,  the  cur-
rent study contrasts the findings of Klein et al., [32] that 
reported low sports nutrition among their athletes. This 
current study further disagrees with a more recent study 
of young athletes that reported poor average sports nutri-
tion knowledge of its’ male and female respondents [29]. 
Generally,  the  differences  in  the  sports  nutrition  knowl-
edge could be attributed to the different education levels, 
competition levels, and the access to nutrition education 
by  participants  in  the  different  studies  reviewed.  From 
our study, good sports nutrition knowledge can be attrib-
uted to the role of the athletic trainers in guiding athletes 
in  the  camps,  since  the  camps  cannot  afford  the  costs 
that come with employment of nutrition professionals.

Our  study  found  a  statistically  significant  relationship 
between athletes’ sports nutrition knowledge and dietary 
practice  which  correlates  with  a  review  that  established 
that  nutrition  knowledge  had  a  weak  positive  relation-
ship  with  positive  dietary  changes  [17].  Even  though 
our  results  did  not  show  a  relationship  between  previ-
ously  attending  a  nutrition  course  with  sports  nutrition 

Musau et al. BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation          (2025) 17:110 Page 9 of 13

knowledge,  this  phenomenon  of  ‘when  we  know  better, 
we do better’ has also been demonstrated in other stud-
ies  on  sports  nutrition  knowledge  [32,  37],  and  in  other 
health  domains,  such  as  good  menstrual  hygiene  and 
child  caregiving  where  higher  literacy  is  associated  with 
better  behaviours  [38,  39].  Hence,  it  is  important  to 
enhance  athletes’  sports  nutrition  knowledge.  It  is  note-
worthy,  however,  that  in  Uganda,  Nassanga  et  al.,  [38] 
reported that a combination of factors interplay when it 
comes to how knowledge is translated into proper dietary 
practices.  Primarily,  poverty,  food  security,  the  attitudes 
of  the  individuals,  and  the  nature  of  jobs  people  are 
engaged in are key determinants of nutritional knowledge 
transfer.  In  our  cohort,  in  particular,  the  median  house-
hold income was Uganda Shillings (UGX) 100,000 which 
was  not  only  associated  with  Sports  Nutrition  Knowl-
edge  (SNK),  but  household  income  may  not  be  enough 
to  allow  athletes  purchase  and  consume  all  the  food 
groups in the requisite amounts. Hence, despite Ugandan 
endurance  athletes  being  knowledgeable  about  sports 
nutrition,  they  may  not  have  the  resources  available  to 
practice  optimum  sports  nutrition  due  to  low  socioeco-
nomic status [40]. Also, we assert that the family income 
of our athletes does not allow most athletes subscribe to 
specialised paid services in the form of nutritional coun-
selling which leaves out the economically disadvantaged.

Concerning  the  source  of  nutrition  information,  the 
majority  of  the  respondents  identified  athletic  trainers 
as a popular source of knowledge used in the camps, fol-
lowed  by  parents/  family.  Nutritionists/Dietitians,  inter-
net, TV/Radio, magazines, and others like doctors, peers, 
and  schools  were  rarely  consulted  for  sports  nutrition 
information.  These  study  findings  are  similar  to  other 
studies,  which  found  that  coaches/trainers  are  popular 
sources athletes rely on for nutrition knowledge [20, 26, 
36,  41,  42].  However,  this  contrasts  with  Kathure  et  al., 
[21]  who  showed  that  60%  of  their  Endurance  athletes 
relied  on  the  Internet  as  the  main  source  of  nutrition 
information.  Further,  findings  from  UK  and  Malaysian 
athletes  show  that  33–82%  of  them  relied  on  internet/
web  sources  for  nutrition  information  [43,  44].  Interest-
ingly, peer-reviewed literature was identified as the main 
source  of  information  by  Hispanic  ultra-endurance  ath-
letes [45], while nutritionists and dietitians were popular 
sources amongst athletes from Australia [46].

In our cohort, less than a tenth consulted a nutrition-
ist  for  nutrition  information.  This  result  was  expected 
because  of  the  lack  of  nutritionists/dietitians  in  ath-
lete  support  staff  in  low  and  middle-income  countries 
(LMICs)  such  as  Uganda,  due  to  inadequate  budgets  to 
cover  the  cost  of  such  specialized  staff  [20].  Also,  there 
exists  a  gap  in  the  enrolment  and  training  of  nutrition-
ists/dietitians  within  tertiary  institutions  in  low  and 
middle-income  countries  (LMICs)  [47,  48].  In  Uganda, 

the majority of graduate nutritionists and dietitians from 
tertiary  institutions  enter  the  job  market  with  incom-
petencies  in  some  crucial  domains  of  practice  [49].  In 
contrast,  high-income  countries  (HICs)  tend  to  have 
specialized  and  rigorously  licensed  and  certified  athlete 
nutrition  staff  [50,  51].  Access  to  credible  knowledge 
from  nutritionists/dietitians  could  help  inform  dietary 
changes that in turn promote the healthy nutritional sta-
tus of athletes [52, 53] and reduce the likelihood of mis-
information [4, 54]. Since African athletes rely primarily 
on their coaches/trainers for nutrition knowledge, it may 
be  prudent  to  incorporate  nutrition  education  in  coach 
education [55, 56] as well as for athletes themselves [57]. 
Moreover,  the  earlier  this  nutrition  education  is  done, 
the sooner it will shape eating habits that are carried on 
into  their  careers  and  adulthood  [58].  From  the  litera-
ture, there exists an increasing use of unreliable sources 
of  nutrition  information  by  athlete  populations  espe-
cially:  internet  and  coaches.  With  the  popularity  and 
convenience of the internet, unguided use of internet for 
nutrition  information  could  potentially  expose  athletes 
to  misinformation.  Therefore,  our  athletes  could  benefit 
from  web  sources  with  recommendations  by  nutrition 
professionals.  Athletic  trainers  could  also  benefit  from 
supplementary training on the core practical concepts of 
sports nutrition to support their athletes in routine train-
ing and competitions.

In  our  cohort  different  food  groups  were  consumed 
with  varying  frequencies,  with  high  frequencies  of  con-
sumption observed in the cereal and legume food groups, 
while  lower  frequencies  were  recorded  amongst  protein 
source foods and fruits. consumed. The high cereal con-
sumption is likely a reflection of the geographic location 
of  the  region,  which  is  typically  mountainous  with  no 
viable  fishing  grounds  (lakes,  swamps,  and  rivers).  Fish 
is  only  obtained  from  markets  distant  from  the  region. 
Cereals like maize and millet are readily available in this 
region  from  cultivation  as  are  legumes  and  nuts.  This 
variation in the frequency is related to the accessibility of 
food by athletes [59]. A previous report on dietary diver-
sity  supports  findings  of  the  current  study  where  high 
frequency  of  cereals  consumption  was  observed  by  ath-
letes as cereals (maize, wheat, and millet) make up a big 
part of the diet of inhabitants in Eastern, Northern and as 
well in the Southern African regions [60].

Our  cohort  showed  a  low  frequency  of  meat/poultry, 
fish/make,  and  milk/eggs  consumption  by  endurance 
athletes.  This  low  consumption  of  animal  protein  may 
indirectly translate into inadequate protein intake in this 
population.  Similarly  reported  by  Moss  et  al.,  protein 
needs  were  not  met  by  their  endurance  athletes,  espe-
cially  female  athletes  [61].  Inadequate  protein  intake 
in  endurance  training  compromises  protein  synthesis, 
compromises  the  immune  system,  promotes  muscle 

Musau et al. BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation          (2025) 17:110 Page 10 of 13

atrophy, and prolongs recovery [62, 63]. In contrast, Lin 
et al. show evidence of enhanced endurance training with 
adequate protein intake [64]. Endurance athletes require 
a  recommended  daily  allowance  (RDA)  of  protein  in 
a  range  not  greater  than  1.6  g  protein  per  kg  (  PRO/kg) 
of body weight to maintain lean muscle mass [65, 66]. It 
is  imperative  that  our  endurance  athletes  consume  the 
RDA  of  proteins  in  their  diets,  for  optimum  nutritional 
status and general health and wellbeing.

In  the  current  study,  root/tubers  (e.g.,  sweet,  pota-
toes,  cassava,  yams)  were  not  consumed  as  highly  as 
reported  in  other  studies  [33].  Overall,  the  frequency 
of  food  group  consumption  is  different  from  the  profile 
observed among Nigerian athletes whose most frequently 
consumed  food  groups  were,  fish/meat,  milk,  and  eggs 
(70.0–  80.0%),  and  the  least  frequently  consumed  food 
groups  were  legumes-nuts  (25.0%)  and  healthy  root-
tubers (15.0%) [26]. Similar to a study on student athletes 
in Nigeria, knowledge positively related to the consump-
tion of root/tubers like yams in Nigeria [33], SNK in our 
cohort  was  significantly  and  positively  associated  with 
root  /tuber  consumption.  However,  other  studies  have 
not  observed  the  same  [10].  Kamande  et  al.,  [67]  found 
a  strong  positive  association  between  knowledge  and 
legume and fruit consumption of Kenyan athletes unlike 
in  the  present  study.  This  implies  that  Ugandan  endur-
ance  athletes  have  a  tendency  to  consume  tuber/roots 
that  are  a  key  component  in  endurance  carbohydrate 
fuelling  techniques,  and  special  attention  could  be  put 
on  the  timing  strategies  and  frequency  of  consumption 
before and during competition.

Recommendations

Since  the  athletes  in  this  study  often  consult  athletic 
trainers for nutrition knowledge, the National Council of 
Sports Uganda should develop routine capacity-building 
programs to offer supplementary Sports nutrition train-
ing to trainers. This knowledge in turn will hopefully be 
disseminated to endurance athletes in training sessions in 
their camps. In the long term, it is important that nutri-
tionists/dietitians  be  engaged  as  part  of  athlete  support 
personnel  to  ensure  good  SNK  as  well  as  optimal  con-
sumption of nutrients in Ugandan endurance athletes.

Management of athletic camps to incorporate protein-
rich  diets  in  athletes’  daily  and  weekly  meal  plans  for 
optimal protein intake.

Limitations and suggestions for future studies

This  study  is  not  without  limitations.  Firstly,  the  cohort 
only included 100 young endurance athletes from Sebei, 
with  a  few  years  of  experience  in  athletics.  Hence,  the 
results  should  be  generalized  to  other  Ugandan  regions 
and age cohorts with caution.

Secondly,  the  study  did  not  objectively  assess  athletes’ 
dietary  intake  but  relied  on  self-reported  practices  and 
food consumption frequency from different food groups. 
This  has  the  inherent  weaknesses  of  recall  bias,  social 
desirability  bias,  as  well  as  inaccuracy.  Studies  that  pro-
spectively  assess  the  adequacy  of  nutrient  intake  by  this 
population are suggested.

Conclusion
This study concluded that the majority of the athletes had 
good knowledge of sports nutrition and adequate dietary 
practices.  Sex  differences  in  SNK  and  dietary  practices 
were  observed  in  this  cohort,  which  may  have  implica-
tions  for  the  development  of  sex-specific  sports  nutri-
tion  educational  materials.  The  intake  of  protein-rich 
food  was  inadequate,  as  shown  by  the  low  frequency  of 
meat, fish, eggs, and poultry consumption. This may have 
implications  for  injury  risk  and  athletic  performance. 
The athletic trainer was identified as the most frequently 
consulted  source  of  SNK  in  the  camps  and  nutrition-
ists/dietitians/doctors  were  rarely  consulted.  Therefore, 
Sports  Nutrition  should  be  included  in  the  training  of 
coaches/athletic trainers.

Abbreviations
SNK 
DCP 
DP 

 Sports Nutrition Knowledge
 Dietary Consumption Pattern
 Dietary Practice

Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r 
g /  1 0 .  1 1 8 6  / s  1 3 1 0 2 - 0 2 5 - 0 1 1 5 7 - 8.

Supplementary Material 1

Supplementary Material 2

Acknowledgements
I extend my gratitude to the following personalities: Mr. David Chesang- the 
Assistant Chief Administrative Officer of Kapchorwa District (A. CAO), Tunde 
Alfred-Sports Officer of Kapchorwa District, Peter Chelangat-Elite coach, 
and Moses Cherop-Junior Coach for their support and coordination in data 
collection. Many thanks to the Joshua Cheptegei Foundation (JOCDEF) for 
permission to access Junior Athletes.I also thank the management of PAULESI 
for the support during this study tract and more especially Prof A.O. Fadojou 
Head of Department, Human Kinetics, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.

Author contributions
OFF(Phd) contributed to the drafts of the entire project, design of the research 
tools, advice in the data management and interpretation, as well as project 
supervisor. JM(MSc) contributed to the draft of the concept note to this 
study, data collection, and introduction and abstract sections while NSM(Phd) 
contributed to the introduction, table presentation, discussion section of the 
paper, as well as project co-supervisor and editing of the final manuscript. All 
authors edited and read the final draft of the manuscript before submission.

Funding
This study was entirely funded by the African Union Commission (AUC) 
through the Pan African University Life and Earth Sciences Institute (Including 
Health and Agriculture), Ibadan, Nigeria.

Musau et al. BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation          (2025) 17:110 Data availability
Data presented in this study are availed upon request to the corresponding 
author at: musaujoshua2017@gmail.com.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
The ethics review committee of Uganda National Council of Science and 
Technology (UNCST) (Ref No: HG2674ES) approved the study. Informed 
consent was obtained from each participant above consenting age 
while for those under 18 years old, their parents and legal guardians gave 
informed consent for participation in our study. This was done after giving 
an explanation of our study objectives and answering all questions from the 
participants, parents or legal guardians regarding the study.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
NSM is an Editor for the British Journal of Sports Medicine (BJSM) while JM and 
OFF declare no conflicting interests.

Author details
1Sports Management and Policy Development Program, The Pan 
African University Life and Earth Sciences Institute (including Health and 
Agriculture– PAULESI), 200132 Ibadan, Nigeria
2Department of Human Kinetics, Faculty of Education, University of 
Ibadan, 200284 Ibadan, Nigeria
3Department of Human Nutrition and Dietetics, College of Medicine, 
University of Ibadan, 200285 Ibadan, Nigeria
4Department of Family Medicine, University College Hospital (UCH), 
200285 Ibadan, Nigeria
5Department of Sports, Exercise and Rehabilitation, Northumbria 
University, Newcastle upon Tyne,, UK
6Department of Human Movement Science, Nelson Mandela University, 
Gqeberha, , South Africa,
7Department of Rehabilitation, Midlands State University, Gweru, 
Zimbabwe
8NtombiSports (PTY) Ltd, Cape Town, South Africa

Received: 22 August 2024 / Accepted: 15 April 2025

References
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

Costa RJS, Knechtle B, Tarnopolsky M, Hoffman MD. Nutrition for Ultramara-
thon Running: Trail, Track, and Road. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab [Internet]. 
2019 Mar 1 [cited 2022 Nov 20];29(2):130–40. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / j o u  r n  a l s  . 
h u  m a n k  i n  e t i  c s .  c o m /  v i  e w /  j o u  r n a l  s /  i j s  n e m  / 2 9 /  2 /  a r t i c l e - p 1 3 0 . x m l
Burke LM, Castell LM, Casa DJ, Close GL, Costa RJS, Desbrow B et al. Interna-
tional Association of Athletics Federations Consensus Statement 2019: Nutri-
tion for Athletics. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab [Internet]. 2019 Mar 1 [cited 
2022 Nov 20];29(2):73–84. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / j o u  r n  a l s  . h u  m a n k  i n  e t i  c s .  c o m 
/  v i  e w /  j o u  r n a l  s /  i j s  n e m  / 2 9 /  2 /  a r t i c l e - p 7 3 . x m l
Pelly FE, Burkhart SJ. Dietary Regimens of Athletes Competing at the Delhi 
2010 Commonwealth Games. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab [Internet]. 2014 
Feb [cited 2023 Sep 6];24(1):28–36. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / j o u  r n  a l s  . h u  m a n k  i n  
e t i  c s .  c o m /  v i  e w /  j o u  r n a l  s /  i j s  n e m  / 2 4 /  1 /  a r t i c l e - p 2 8 . x m l
Thomas DT, Erdman KA, Burke LM. American college of sports medicine joint 
position statement. Nutrition and athletic performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2016;48(3):543–68.
Trakman GL, Forsyth A, Hoye R, Belski R. The nutrition for sport knowledge 
questionnaire (NSKQ): development and validation using classical test theory 
and Rasch analysis. J Int Soc Sports Nutr [Internet]. 2017 Jan 3 [cited 2022 
Nov 26];14(1):26. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . t  a n d  f o n  l i n e  . c  o m /  d o i  / f u l  l /   h t t  p s : 
/  / d  o i .  o r g  / 1 0 .  1 1  8 6 / s 1 2 9 7 0 - 0 1 7 - 0 1 8 2 - y

6.  Heikkilä L, Autio, Fogelholm V. The Impact of Nutrition Education Interven-

tion with and Without a Mobile Phone Application on Nutrition Knowledge 
Among Young Endurance Athletes. Nutrients [Internet]. 2019 Sep 18 [cited 

Page 11 of 13

7. 

8. 

2023 Apr 12];11(9):2249. Available from:  h t t  p s : /  / w w  w .  m d p i . c o m     / 2 0 7 2 - 6 6 4 3 / 1 
1 / 9 / 2 2 4 9 .   
Sánchez-Díaz S, Yanci J, Castillo D, Scanlan AT, Raya-González J. Effects of 
Nutrition Education Interventions in Team Sport Players. A Systematic Review. 
Nutrients [Internet]. 2020 Nov 28 [cited 2023 Jan 19];12(12):3664. Available 
from: https:/ /www.md pi.com / 2072-6643/12/12/3664.
Backholer K, Spencer E, Gearon E, Magliano DJ, McNaughton SA, Shaw JE 
et al. The association between socio-economic position and diet quality in 
Australian adults. Public Health Nutr [Internet]. 2016 Feb [cited 2022 Nov 
21];19(3):477–85. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . c  a m b  r i d  g e . o  r g  / c o  r e /  p r o d  u c  t / i  
d e n  t i fi   e r  / S 1  3 6 8  9 8 0 0  1 5  0 0 1  4 7 0  / t y p  e /  j o u r n a l _ a r t i c l e

9.  Deroover K, Bucher T, Vandelanotte C, de Vries H, Duncan MJ. Practical Nutri-
tion Knowledge Mediates the Relationship Between Sociodemographic 
Characteristics and Diet Quality in Adults: A Cross-Sectional Analysis. Am J 
Health Promot [Internet]. 2020 Jan [cited 2022 Oct 16];34(1):59–62. Available 
from:  h t t p  : / /  j o u r  n a  l s .  s a g  e p u b  . c  o m /  d o i  /  h t  t p s  : / /  d o i .  o r  g / 1  0 . 1  1 7 7 /  0 8  9 0 1 1 7 1 1 9 8 
7 8 0 7 4

10.  Koch F, Hoffmann I, Claupein E. Types of Nutrition Knowledge, Their Socio-

Demographic Determinants and Their Association With Food Consumption: 
Results of the NEMONIT Study. Front Nutr [Internet]. 2021 Feb 12 [cited 2023 
Aug 6];8:630014. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . f  r o n  t i e  r s i n  . o  r g /  a r t  i c l e  s /   h t t  p s : /  / 
d  o i .  o r g  / 1 0 .  3 3  8 9 /  f n u  t . 2 0  2 1  . 6 3 0 0 1 4 / f u l l

11.  Nor Azizam NS, Yusof SN, Amon JJ, Ahmad A, Safii NS, Jamil NA. Sports Nutri-

tion and Food Knowledge among Malaysian University Athletes. Nutrients 
[Internet]. 2022 Jan 28 [cited 2022 Nov 26];14(3):572. Available from:  h t t  p s : /  / 
w w  w .  m d p i . c o m     / 2 0 7 2 - 6 6 4 3 / 1 4 / 3 / 5 7 2 .   

12.  Renard M, Anton-Solanas A, Kelly DT, Ó Catháin C. Evaluation of nutrition 

knowledge in elite and sub-elite Gaelic football players. Sci Med Footb. 
2022;6(1):82–8.

13.  Marino M, Masella R, Bulzomi P, Campesi I, Malorni W, Franconi F. Nutrition 
and human health from a sex–gender perspective. Mol Aspects Med [Inter-
net]. 2011 Feb [cited 2025 Mar 9];32(1):1–70. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / l i n  k i  n g h  u 
b .  e l s e  v i  e r .  c o m  / r e t  r i  e v e  / p i  i / S 0  0 9  8 2 9 9 7 1 1 0 0 0 0 2 1

14.  Grzymisławska M, Puch EA, Zawada A, Grzymisławski M. Do nutritional 

behaviors depend on biological sex and cultural gender? Adv Clin Exp Med 
[Internet]. 2020 Feb 4 [cited 2025 Mar 8];29(1):165–72. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / 
a d v  a n  c e s  . u m  w . e d  u .  p l /  e n /  a r t i  c l  e / 2 0 2 0 / 2 9 / 1 / 1 6 5 /

15.  Heavey P. Conference on ‘Understanding the role of sex and gender in nutri-
tion research’. Proc Nutr Soc [Internet]. 2024 May [cited 2025 Mar 8];83(2):63–
5. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . c  a m b  r i d  g e . o  r g  / c o  r e /  p r o d  u c  t / i  d e n  t i fi   e r  / S 0  0 2 9  
6 6 5 1  2 3  0 0 3  7 4 9  / t y p  e /  j o u r n a l _ a r t i c l e

16.  Gaylis JB, Levy SS, Hong MY. Relationships between body weight perception, 

body mass index, physical activity, and food choices in Southern California 
male and female adolescents. Int J Adolesc Youth [Internet]. 2020 Dec 31 
[cited 2024 Jun 17];25(1):264–75. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . t  a n d  f o n  l i n e  . c  o 
m /  d o i  / f u l  l /   h t t  p s : /  / d  o i .  o r g  / 1 0 .  1 0  8 0 /  0 2 6  7 3 8 4  3 .  2 0 1 9 . 1 6 1 4 4 6 5

17.  Spronk I, Kullen C, Burdon C, O’Connor H. Relationship between nutrition 

18. 

knowledge and dietary intake. Br J Nutr [Internet]. 2014 May 28 [cited 2023 
Aug 9];111(10):1713–26. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . c  a m b  r i d  g e . o  r g  / c o  r e /  p r 
o d  u c  t / i  d e n  t i fi   e r  / S 0  0 0 7  1 1 4 5  1 4  0 0 0  0 8 7  / t y p  e /  j o u r n a l _ a r t i c l e
Janiczak A, Devlin BL, Forsyth A, Trakman GL. A systematic review update of 
athletes’ nutrition knowledge and association with dietary intake. Br J Nutr 
[Internet]. 2022 Sep 28 [cited 2023 Aug 7];128(6):1156–69. Available from:  h t t 
p  s : /  / w w w  . c  a m b  r i d  g e . o  r g  / c o  r e /  p r o d  u c  t / i  d e n  t i fi   e r  / S 0  0 0 7  1 1 4 5  2 1  0 0 4  3 1 1  / t y p  e /  
j o u r n a l _ a r t i c l e

19.  Citarella R, Itani L, Intini V, Zucchinali G, Scevaroli S, Kreidieh D et al. Nutri-

tional Knowledge and Dietary Practice in Elite 24-Hour Ultramarathon Run-
ners: A Brief Report. Sports [Internet]. 2019 Feb 16 [cited 2023 Aug 9];7(2):44. 
Available from: http:// www.mdp i.com/ 2 075-4663/7/2/44.

20.  Muwonge H, Makubuya T, Lubega SK, Zavuga R, Mukana RS. Nutrition 

Supplementation Practices of Recreational Gym Users in Uganda’s Capital 
City: A Cross Sectional Study [Internet]. In Review; 2021 Nov [cited 2023 Aug 
6]. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . r  e s e  a r c  h s q u  a r  e . c  o m /  a r t i  c l  e / r s - 9 9 3 7 3 9 / v 1
21.  Kathure D, Bukhala P, Konyole S. Assessment of nutrition knowledge and 
sources of nutrition information among middle- and long-distance elite 
athletes in North Rift region of Kenya. Afr J Food Agric Nutr Dev [Internet]. 
2022 Jul 19 [cited 2023 May 8];22(5):20300–16. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / a j f  a n  d . 
n  e t /  V o l u  m e  2 2 /  N o 5  / M u r  i t  h i 2 2 4 4 5 . p d f

22.  Atugonza MD. The Knowledge, Atitude, and Practices of Athletes in the 
uptake of dietary Suppliments: A Case of Makerere University [Internet] 
[thesis]. [Kampala, Uganda]: Makerere University; 2022 [cited 2023 Oct 10]. 
Available from:  h t t p  : / /  h d l .  h a  n d l  e . n  e t / 2  0 .  5 0 0 . 1 2 2 8 1 / 1 4 0 6 8

Musau et al. BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation          (2025) 17:110 23.  Turnbull S. Cheptegei joins all-time greats after winning third world 10,000m 

39. 

title in Budapest [Internet]. BUDAPEST: WORLD ATHLETICS; 2023 Aug [cited 
2024 Mar 31]. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w o r  l d  a t h  l e t  i c s .  o r  g / c  o m p  e t i t  i o  n s /  w o r  l 
d - a  t h  l e t  i c s  - c h a  m p  i o n  s h i  p s / w  o r  l d -  a t h  l e t i  c s  - c h  a m p  i o n s  h i  p s -  b u d  a p e s  t -  2 0 2  3 - 7  
1 3 8 9  8 7  / n e  w s /  r e p o  r t  / w c h - b u d a p e s t - 2 3 - r e p o r t - m e n - 1 0 0 0 0 m
Javier S. Teryet national training centre certified by world Athletics [Internet]. 
New Vission & Radio. 2023. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . n  e w v  i s i  o n . c  o .  u g /  c a t  e 
g o r  y /  s p o  r t s  / t e r  y e  t - n  a t i  o n a l  - t  r a i  n i n  g - c e  n t  r e - c e r t i fi  e d - b y - N V _ 1 5 6 0 8 5

24. 

25.  Yamane T, Book Reviews. Statistics, An Introductory Analysis by Taro Yamane. 
New York: Harper and Row, 1964. Pp. xvi + 734. $8.75. Educ Psychol Meas 
[Internet]. 1964 Dec [cited 2024 Mar 19];24(4):981–3. Available from:  h t t p  : / /  j o 
u r  n a  l s .  s a g  e p u b  . c  o m /  d o i  /  h t  t p s  : / /  d o i .  o r  g / 1  0 . 1  1 7 7 /  0 0  1 3 1 6 4 4 6 4 0 2 4 0 0 4 3 4
26.  Folasire OF, Akomolafe AA, Sanusi RA. Does Nutrition Knowledge and Practice 
of Athletes Translate to Enhanced Athletic Performance? Cross-Sectional 
Study Amongst Nigerian Undergraduate Athletes. Glob J Health Sci [Inter-
net]. 2015 Mar 18 [cited 2023 Feb 14];7(5):p215. Available from:  h t t p  : / /  w w w .  c 
c  s e n  e t .  o r g /  j o  u r n  a l /  i n d e  x .  p h p  / g j  h s / a  r t  i c l e / v i e w / 4 1 2 3 8

27.  Kubayi NA. Female Sport Participation In South African Rural Schools: Analysis 
Of Socio-Cultural Constraints. Eur Rev Appl Sociol [Internet]. 2015 Jun 1 [cited 
2024 Jun 17];8(10):6–10. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . s  c i e  n d o  . c o m  / a  r t i  c l e  /  h t  t 
p s  : / /  d o i .  o r  g / 1  0 . 1  5 1 5 /  e r  a s - 2 0 1 5 - 0 0 0 1

28.  Baranauskas M, Stukas R, Tubelis L, Žagminas K, Šurkienė G, Švedas E et al. 
Nutritional habits among high-performance endurance athletes. Medicina 
(Mex) [Internet]. 2015 [cited 2023 Aug 9];51(6):351–62. Available from:  h t t p  : / /  l 
i n k  i n  g h u  b . e  l s e v  i e  r . c  o m /  r e t r  i e  v e /  p i i  / S 1 0  1 0  6 6 0 X 1 5 0 0 1 0 1 9

29.  Magee MK, Jones MT, Fields JB, Kresta J, Khurelbaatar C, Dodge C et al. Body 
Composition, Energy Availability, Risk of Eating Disorder, and Sport Nutrition 
Knowledge in Young Athletes. Nutrients [Internet]. 2023 Mar 21 [cited 2024 
Jan 30];15(6):1502. Available from:  h t t  p s : /  / w w  w .  m d p i . c o m     / 2 0 7 2 - 6 6 4 3 / 1 5 / 6 / 1 
5 0 2 .   

30.  Md B, Md M-ur-R, Md K, Sultana N, Rahman SS. Determinants of nutrition 

knowledge, attitude and practices of adolescent sports trainee: A cross-
sectional study in Bangladesh. Heliyon [Internet]. 2021 Apr [cited 2025 Mar 
8];7(4):e06637. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / l i n  k i  n g h  u b .  e l s e  v i  e r .  c o m  / r e t  r i  e v e  / p i  i / S 2  
4 0  5 8 4 4 0 2 1 0 0 7 4 0 4

31.  Thapa M, Neupane A, Shrestha SKD, Nepal P, Upadhyaya A, Niraula P et al. 

Factors affecting nutritional knowledge, attitude, practices and dietary intake 
among national players in Kathmandu, Nepal: a cross-sectional study. BMC 
Sports Sci Med Rehabil [Internet]. 2023 Jun 30 [cited 2023 Aug 7];15(1):73. 
Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / b m c  s p  o r t  s s c  i m e d  r e  h a b  i l .  b i o m  e d  c e n  t r a  l . c o  m /  a r t  i c l  e s /   
h t t  p s :  / / d o  i .  o r g  / 1 0  . 1 1 8  6 /  s 1 3 1 0 2 - 0 2 3 - 0 0 6 9 1 - 7

32.  Klein DJ, Eck KM, Walker AJ, Pellegrino JK, Freidenreich DJ. Assessment of 

Sport Nutrition Knowledge, Dietary Practices, and Sources of Nutrition Infor-
mation in NCAA Division III Collegiate Athletes. Nutrients [Internet]. 2021 Aug 
26 [cited 2022 Nov 19];13(9):2962. Available from:  h t t  p s : /  / w w  w .  m d p i . c o m     / 2 0 
7 2 - 6 6 4 3 / 1 3 / 9 / 2 9 6 2 .   

33.  Oladunni MO, Sanusi RA. Nutritional status and dietary pattern of male 

athletes in Ibadan, South Western Nigeria. Niger J Physiol Sci Off Publ Physiol 
Soc Niger. 2013;28(2):165–71.

34.  De La Puente Yagüe M, Collado Yurrita L, Ciudad Cabañas M, Cuadrado 

Cenzual M. Role of Vitamin D in Athletes and Their Performance: Current 
Concepts and New Trends. Nutrients [Internet]. 2020 Feb 23 [cited 2023 Aug 
30];12(2):579. Available from: https:/ /www.md pi.com / 2072-6643/12/2/579.

35.  Bongiovanni T, Genovesi F, Nemmer M, Carling C, Alberti G, Howatson G. 

Nutritional interventions for reducing the signs and symptoms of exercise-
induced muscle damage and accelerate recovery in athletes: current 
knowledge, practical application and future perspectives. Eur J Appl Physiol. 
2020;120(9):1965–96.

36.  Tugli LSY, adoju AOF, Abonie US, Tugli FM, Tobin-West HS, Socioeconomic 

Standards. Nutritional Knowledge and Dietary Habits of Ghanaian Athletes: 
A Study of Three Major Sporting Regions in Ghana. J Adv Sports Phys Educ 
[Internet]. 2022 May 17 [cited 2022 Nov 26];5(5):77–95. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  
/ s a u  d i  j o u  r n a  l s . c  o m  / m e  d i a  / a r t  i c  l e s  / J A  S P E _  5 5  _ 7 7 - 9 5 . p d f

37.  Abbey EL, Wright CJ, Kirkpatrick CM. Nutrition practices and knowledge 

among NCAA Division III football players. J Int Soc Sports Nutr [Internet]. 2017 
Jan 3 [cited 2023 Aug 20];14(1):13. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . t  a n d  f o n  l i n e  . c  
o m /  d o i  / f u l  l /   h t t  p s : /  / d  o i .  o r g  / 1 0 .  1 1  8 6 / s 1 2 9 7 0 - 0 1 7 - 0 1 7 0 - 2

38.  Nassanga P, Okello-Uma I, Ongeng D. The status of nutritional knowledge, 

attitude and practices associated with complementary feeding in a post-con-
flict development phase setting: The case of Acholi sub-region of Uganda. 
Food Sci Nutr [Internet]. 2018 Nov [cited 2023 May 8];6(8):2374–85. Available 
from:  h t t p  s : /  / o n l  i n  e l i  b r a  r y . w  i l  e y .  c o m  / d o i  /  h  t t p  s : / /  d o  i . o  r g /  1 0 . 1  0 0  2 / f s n 3 . 8 2 9

Page 12 of 13

Idoko LO, Okafor KC, Ayegba VO, Bala S, Evuka VB. Knowledge and Practice 
of Menstrual Health and Hygiene among Young People in Jos, Plateau 
State, Nigeria. Open J Obstet Gynecol [Internet]. 2022 [cited 2024 Jun 
22];12(04):292–308. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . s  c i r  p . o  r g / j  o u  r n a  l / d  o i . a  s p  x ? d  
o i =  1 0 . 4  2 3  6 / o j o g.2022.124028.

40.  Adebisi YA, Ibrahim K, Lucero-Prisno DE, Ekpenyong A, Micheal AI, Chineme-

41. 

lum IG et al. Prevalence and Socio-economic Impacts of Malnutrition Among 
Children in Uganda. Nutr Metab Insights [Internet]. 2019 Jan [cited 2024 Jul 
2];12:117863881988739. Available from:  h t t p  : / /  j o u r  n a  l s .  s a g  e p u b  . c  o m /  d o i  /  h t  t 
p s  : / /  d o i .  o r  g / 1  0 . 1  1 7 7 /  1 1  7 8 6 3 8 8 1 9 8 8 7 3 9 8
Jenner SL, Devlin BL, Forsyth AK, Belski R. Assessing the nutrition knowledge 
of professional female Australian football (AFLW) athletes. Sci Med Footb 
[Internet]. 2020 Jul 2 [cited 2022 Oct 16];4(3):240–5. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w 
w w  . t  a n d  f o n  l i n e  . c  o m /  d o i  / f u l  l /   h t t  p s : /  / d  o i .  o r g  / 1 0 .  1 0  8 0 /  2 4 7  3 3 9 3  8 .  2 0 2 0 . 1 7 5 2 9 2 
9

42.  Braun-Trocchio R, Graybeal AJ, Kreutzer A, Warfield E, Renteria J, Harrison K 
et al. Recovery Strategies in Endurance Athletes. J Funct Morphol Kinesiol 
[Internet]. 2022 Feb 13 [cited 2023 Apr 12];7(1):22. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w 
w  . m  d p i  . c o  m / 2 4  1 1  - 5 1 4 2 / 7 / 1 / 2 2

43.  McLeman LA, Ratcliffe K, Clifford T. Pre- and post-exercise nutritional practices 
of amateur runners in the UK: are they meeting the guidelines for optimal 
carbohydrate and protein intakes? Sport Sci Health [Internet]. 2019 Dec [cited 
2023 Aug 12];15(3):511–7. Available from: http:// link.sp ringer. com/   h t t  p s : /  / d  o i 
.  o r g  / 1 0 .  1 0  0 7 /  s 1 1  3 3 2 -  0 1  9 - 0 0 5 3 7 - 1

44.  Sedek R, Yih TY. Dietary Habits and Nutrition Knowledge among Athletes and 

Non-Athletes in National University of Malaysia (UKM). Pak J Nutr [Internet]. 
2014 Nov 15 [cited 2023 Aug 9];13(12):752–9. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . s  c i 
a  l e r  t . n e  t /  a b s  t r a  c t / ?  d o  i = p j n . 2 0 1 4 . 7 5 2 . 7 5 9

45.  Mahoney SE, Wójcicki TR, Carnes AJ. Sources of Nutrition Information in Rec-

reational Ultra-marathon Runners: A Mixed Methods Analysis. J Hum Perform 
Extreme Environ [Internet]. 2020 Dec 31 [cited 2023 Aug 12];16(1). Available 
from:  h t t p  s : /  / d o c  s .  l i b  . p u  r d u e  . e  d u /  j h p  e e / v  o l  1 6 / i s s 1 / 1

46.  Devlin BL, Belski R. Exploring general and sports nutrition and food 

knowledge in elite male Australian athletes. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. 
2015;25(3):225–32.

47.  Oyewole OE, Amosu AM. Department of Public Health, University of Venda, 
Thohoyandou, South Africa. The Nutrition Profession in Africa: Meeting the 
Current and Future Challenges. Int J Adv Nutr Health Sci [Internet]. 2013 Feb 
23 [cited 2024 Jun 22];1(1):18–26. Available from:  h t t p  : / /  m e d i  c a  l . c  l o u  d - j o  u r  n a 
l  s . c  o m / i  n d  e x .  p h p  / I J A  N H  S / a r t i c l e / v i e w / M e d - 4 0

48.  Nkomani S, Ausman LM, Marino-Costello E, Chimera B, Kalimbira A, Mwan-

gwela A, et al. Nutrition capacity Building to Meet National priorities: lessons 
learned in developing and implementing Malawi’s first dietetics program. 
Glob Health Sci Pract. 2021;9(4):928–35.

49.  Kikomeko PK, Ochola S, Kaaya AN, Ogada I, Birungi TL, Nakitto P. Stakeholders’ 
perceptions of the nutrition and dietetics needs and the requisite profes-
sional competencies in Uganda: a cross-sectional mixed methods study. 
BMC Health Serv Res [Internet]. 2021 Dec [cited 2024 Jul 2];21(1):92. Available 
from:  h t t p  s : /  / b m c  h e  a l t  h s e  r v r e  s .  b i o  m e d  c e n t  r a  l . c  o m /  a r t i  c l  e s /   h t t p  s :  / / d  o i .  o r g /  1 
0  . 1 1 8 6 / s 1 2 9 1 3 - 0 2 1 - 0 6 0 9 0 - 3

50.  Torres-McGehee TM, Pritchett KL, Zippel D, Minton DM, Cellamare A, Sibilia 

M. Sports Nutrition Knowledge Among Collegiate Athletes, Coaches, Athletic 
Trainers, and Strength and Conditioning Specialists. J Athl Train [Internet]. 
2012 Mar 1 [cited 2024 Jul 16];47(2):205–11. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / m e r  i d  i a n  . 
a l  l e n p  r e  s s .  c o m  / j a t  / a  r t i  c l e  / 4 7 /  2 /  2 0 5  / 1 1  1 3 2 7  / S  p o r  t s -  N u t r  i t  i o n  - K n  o w l e  d g  e - A m 
o n g - C o l l e g i a t e

51.  Muwonge H, Zavuga R, Kabenge PA, Makubuya T. Nutritional supplement 

practices of professional Ugandan athletes: a cross-sectional study. J Int Soc 
Sports Nutr [Internet]. 2017 Jan 3 [cited 2022 Nov 19];14(1):41. Available from:  
h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . t  a n d  f o n  l i n e  . c  o m /  d o i  / f u l  l /   h t t  p s : /  / d  o i .  o r g  / 1 0 .  1 1  8 6 / s 1 2 9 7 0 - 0 1 7 - 0 
1 9 8 - 3

52.  Spronk I, Heaney SE, Prvan T, O’Connor HT. Relationship Between General 
Nutrition Knowledge and Dietary Quality in Elite Athletes. Int J Sport Nutr 
Exerc Metab [Internet]. 2015 Jun [cited 2022 Nov 26];25(3):243–51. Available 
from:  h t t p  s : /  / j o u  r n  a l s  . h u  m a n k  i n  e t i  c s .  c o m /  v i  e w /  j o u  r n a l  s /  i j s  n e m  / 2 5 /  3 /  a r t i c l 
e - p 2 4 3 . x m l

53.  Rosi A, Ferraris C, Guglielmetti M, Meroni E, Charron M, Menta R et al. 

Validation of a General and Sports Nutrition Knowledge Questionnaire in 
Italian Early Adolescents. Nutrients [Internet]. 2020 Oct 13 [cited 2023 Jul 
27];12(10):3121. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . m  d p i  . c o  m / 2 0  7 2  - 6 6 4 3 / 1 2 / 1 0 / 3 1 
2 1

Musau et al. BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation          (2025) 17:110 Page 13 of 13

54.  Bird SP, Rushton BD. Nutritional knowledge of youth academy athletes. BMC 

62.  Stokes T, Hector A, Morton R, McGlory C, Phillips S. Recent Perspectives 

Nutr [Internet]. 2020 Dec [cited 2022 Nov 26];6(1):35. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / b 
m c  n u  t r .  b i o  m e d c  e n  t r a  l . c  o m / a  r t  i c l  e s /  h  t t  p s :  / / d  o i . o  r g  / 1 0  . 1 1  8 6 / s  4 0  7 9 5 - 0 2 0 - 0 0 3 
6 0 - 9

55.  Couture S, Lamarche B, Morissette E, Provencher V, Valois P, Goulet C et al. 
Evaluation of Sports Nutrition Knowledge and Recommendations Among 
High School Coaches. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab [Internet]. 2015 Aug [cited 
2022 Oct 16];25(4):326–34. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / j o u  r n  a l s  . h u  m a n k  i n  e t i  c s .  c o 
m /  v i  e w /  j o u  r n a l  s /  i j s  n e m  / 2 5 /  4 /  a r t i c l e - p 3 2 6 . x m l

56.  Heikkilä M, Valve R, Lehtovirta M, Fogelholm M. Nutrition knowledge among 

young Finnish endurance athletes and their coaches. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc 
Metab. 2018;28(5):522–7.

57.  Danh J, Kurtz J, Nucci A, Doyle J, Feresin R. Assessment of Sports Nutrition 

Knowledge of NCAA Division I Collegiate Athletes. J Acad Nutr Diet [Internet]. 
2020 Sep [cited 2024 Mar 2];120(9):A75. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / l i n  k i  n g h  u b .  e l s 
e  v i  e r .  c o m  / r e t  r i  e v e  / p i  i / S 2  2 1  2 2 6 7 2 2 0 3 0 6 8 0 8

58.  Hamulka J, Wadolowska L, Hoffmann M, Kowalkowska J, Gutkowska K. Effect 

of an Education Program on Nutrition Knowledge, Attitudes toward Nutri-
tion, Diet Quality, Lifestyle, and Body Composition in Polish Teenagers. The 
ABC of Healthy Eating Project: Design, Protocol, and Methodology. Nutrients 
[Internet]. 2018 Oct 5 [cited 2023 Aug 9];10(10):1439. Available from:  h t t p  : / /  w 
w w .  m d  p i .  c o m  / 2 0 7  2 -  6 6 4 3 / 1 0 / 1 0 / 1 4 3 9

59.  University of Nairobi, Muthike K, Imungi C, Muchemi J. G, University of 

Nairobi, Kenya. Nutritional knowledge and dietary diversity of cancer patients 
at the cancer treatment centre, Kenyatta National Hospital, Kenya. Afr J Food 
Agric Nutr Dev [Internet]. 2015 Dec 7 [cited 2024 Mar 19];15(72):10506–21. 
Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . a  j f a  n d .  n e t /  V o  l u m  e 1 5  / N o 5  / M  u t h i k e 1 3 8 6 5 . p d f

60.  Habte TY, Krawinkel M, Dietary Diversity Score. A Measure of Nutritional 

Adequacy or an Indicator of Healthy Diet? J Nutr Health Sci [Internet]. 2016 
Aug [cited 2024 Mar 19];3(3). Available from:  h t t p  : / /  w w w .  a n  n e x  p u b  l i s h  e r  s . c  o / 
f  u l l -  t e  x t /  J N H  / 3 3 0  3 /  D i e  t a r  y - D i  v e  r s i  t y -  S c o r  e -  A - M  e a s  u r e -  o f  - N u  t r i  t i o n  a l  - A d  e q u  a 
c y -  o r  - a n  - I n  d i c a  t o  r - o f - H e a l t h y - D i e t . p h p

61.  Moss K, Kreutzer A, Graybeal AJ, Zhang Y, Braun-Trocchio R, Porter RR et al. 
Nutrient Adequacy in Endurance Athletes. Int J Environ Res Public Health 
[Internet]. 2023 Apr 11 [cited 2023 Aug 26];20(8):5469. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / 
w w w  . m  d p i  . c o  m / 1 6  6 0  - 4 6 0 1 / 2 0 / 8 / 5 4 6 9

Regarding the Role of Dietary Protein for the Promotion of Muscle Hypertro-
phy with Resistance Exercise Training. Nutrients [Internet]. 2018 Feb 7 [cited 
2023 Aug 27];10(2):180. Available from:  h t t  p s : /  / w w  w .  m d p i . c o m     / 2 0 7 2 - 6 6 4 3 / 1 
0 / 2 / 1 8 0 .   

63.  Tarnopolsky MA, MacDougall JD, Atkinson SA. Influence of protein intake 

and training status on nitrogen balance and lean body mass. J Appl Physiol 
[Internet]. 1988 Jan 1 [cited 2023 Aug 27];64(1):187–93. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  
/ w w w  . p  h y s  i o l  o g y .  o r  g / d  o i /  h  t t  p s :  / / d  o i . o  r g  / 1 0  . 1 1  5 2 / j  a p  p l . 1 9 8 8 . 6 4 . 1 . 1 8 7
64.  Lin YN, Tseng TT, Knuiman P, Chan WP, Wu SH, Tsai CL et al. Protein supple-
mentation increases adaptations to endurance training: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Clin Nutr [Internet]. 2021 May [cited 2024 Jul 
2];40(5):3123–32. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / l i n  k i  n g h  u b .  e l s e  v i  e r .  c o m  / r e t  r i  e v e  / p i  i / 
S 0  2 6  1 5 6 1 4 2 0 3 0 6 8 7 7
Jäger R, Kerksick CM, Campbell BI, Cribb PJ, Wells SD, Skwiat TM et al. Interna-
tional Society of Sports Nutrition Position Stand: protein and exercise. J Int 
Soc Sports Nutr [Internet]. 2017 Jan 3 [cited 2023 Aug 27];14(1):20. Available 
from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . t  a n d  f o n  l i n e  . c  o m /  d o i  / f u l  l /   h t t  p s : /  / d  o i .  o r g  / 1 0 .  1 1  8 6 / s 1 2 9 7 
0 - 0 1 7 - 0 1 7 7 - 8

65. 

66.  Witard OC, Garthe I, Phillips SM. Dietary Protein for Training Adaptation and 
Body Composition Manipulation in Track and Field Athletes. Int J Sport Nutr 
Exerc Metab [Internet]. 2019 Mar 1 [cited 2022 Nov 20];29(2):165–74. Avail-
able from:  h t t p  s : /  / j o u  r n  a l s  . h u  m a n k  i n  e t i  c s .  c o m /  v i  e w /  j o u  r n a l  s /  i j s  n e m  / 2 9 /  2 /  a r t 
i c l e - p 1 6 5 . x m l

67.  Kamande P, Bukhala P, Konyole S. Nutritional knowledge and practice of elite 
rugby players in Kenya. Afr J Food Agric Nutr Dev [Internet]. 2022 Jun 15 
[cited 2023 Apr 2];22(4):20148–60. Available from:  h t t p :   /  / a j f a n   d . n  e  t /  V o l u  m e   2 
2  / N  o  4 / K a  m a  n d e 2 2  3 8 5 . p d f

Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Musau et al. BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation          (2025) 17:110
