---
pmid: 40573103
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/40573103
title: Effects of Intermittent Fasting and Calorie Restriction on Exercise Performance - A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
---

Systematic Review
Effects of Intermittent Fasting and Calorie Restriction on
Exercise Performance: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

Fatemeh Kazeminasab 1,*
Randhall B. Carteri 4

, Fatemeh Sharafifard 1

, Ali Bahrami Kerchi 2, Reza Bagheri 3,*

,

, Richard Kirwan 5

, Heitor O. Santos 6

and Fred Dutheil 7

1 Department of Physical Education and Sports Science, Faculty of Humanities, University of Kashan,

Kashan 87317-53153, Iran; fatemeh_sharafifard@yahoo.com

2 Department of Sports Physiology, Faculty of Sports Sciences, Isfahan (Khorasgan) Branch, Islamic Azad

University, Isfahan 81551-39998, Iran; alibahramiker11@gmail.com

3 Department of Exercise Physiology, University of Isfahan, Isfahan 81746-73441, Iran
4 Methodist University Center, Porto Alegre Institute, Porto Alegre 28311, Brazil; rcarteri@outlook.com
5 Research Institute for Sports and Exercise Sciences, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool L3 3AF, UK;

6

7

r.p.kirwan@ljmu.ac.uk
Faculdade UNIGUAÇU, Cascavel 85801-180, Brazil; heitoroliveirasantos@gmail.com
Preventive and Occupational Medicine, Université Clermont Auvergne, CNRS, LaPSCo, Physiological and
Psychosocial Stress, CHU Clermont-Ferrand, University Hospital of Clermont-Ferrand, Witty Fit,
F-63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France; fred_dutheil@yahoo.fr

* Correspondence: f_kazemi85@yahoo.com (F.K.); will.fivb@yahoo.com (R.B.)

Abstract: Context: Intermittent fasting (IF) and calorie restriction (CR) have gained in-
terest as dietary strategies due to their potential for weight loss and multiple metabolic
benefits. These strategies are often accompanied by exercise in an attempt to improve
body composition and physical performance. However, further research is crucial to un-
derstanding whether or not physical performance is affected by the expected weight loss
and related body composition changes in individuals on IF and CR, even when exercise
is combined. Objective: We aimed to systematically evaluate the effects of IF and CR on
exercise performance and body composition in adults aged 18 to 65 years. Data Source:
A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) was con-
ducted following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
(PRISMA) statement. A systematic review was conducted up to April 2024 by search-
ing electronic databases, including PubMed, Web of Science, and Scopus. There was no
limit on publication dates. Data Extraction: The search explored the impact of IF and CR
combined with exercise vs. exercise alone (control) on exercise performance outcomes:
VO2max, handgrip strength, bench press strength, knee extensor strength, leg press strength,
countermovement jump (CMJ), 400 m walk test, and gait speed; body weight, body mass
index (BMI), and body composition: fat-free mass (FFM), fat mass (FM), and body fat
percentage (BFP). Analyses included calculation of weighted mean difference (WMD), stan-
dardized mean difference (SMD), and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) to assess outcomes.
Data Analysis: The meta-analysis included a total of 35 studies, ranging from 4 to 52 weeks
and involving 1266 participants. The results showed that IF (hypocaloric or eucaloric diet)
and CR combined with exercise increased handgrip strength [WMD = 1.707 kg, p = 0.01] com-
pared to exercise alone. Moreover, IF and CR combined with exercise did not significantly
affect VO2max [SMD = 0.005, p = 0.94], bench press strength [WMD = 0.377 kg, p = 0.778],
knee extensor strength [WMD = −4.729 kg, p = 0.12], leg press strength [WMD = −2.874 kg,
p = 0.415], countermovement jump [WMD = −0.226 cm, p = 0.80], 400 m walk test per-
formance [WMD = −8.794 s, p = 0.06], or gait speed [WMD = 0.005 m/s, p = 0.82] com-
pared to exercise alone. Moreover, IF and CR combined with exercise decreased
body weight [WMD = −4.375 kg, p = 0.001], BMI [WMD = −1.194 kg·m−2, p = 0.001],

Academic Editor: Peter WR Lemon

Received: 20 May 2025

Revised: 7 June 2025

Accepted: 8 June 2025

Published: 13 June 2025

Citation: Kazeminasab, F.;

Sharafifard, F.; Bahrami Kerchi, A.;

Bagheri, R.; Carteri, R.B.; Kirwan, R.;

Santos, H.O.; Dutheil, F. Effects of

Intermittent Fasting and Calorie

Restriction on Exercise Performance:

A Systematic Review and Meta-

Analysis. Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992.

https://doi.org/10.3390/nu17121992

Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license

(https://creativecommons.org/

licenses/by/4.0/).

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

https://doi.org/10.3390/nu17121992

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

2 of 43

FFM [WMD = −1.653 kg, p = 0.001], FM [WMD = −2.858 kg, p = 0.001], BFP [WMD = −0.826%,
p = 0.001] compared to exercise alone. Conclusions: IF (hypocaloric or eucaloric) and
CR can be effectively integrated into exercise training without negatively impacting most
measures of physical performance, while significantly enhancing weight loss and adiposity-
related outcomes. The findings from this meta-analysis involving both athletes and non-
athletes suggest that weight loss induced by IF and CR combined with exercise does not
necessarily result in reduced physical performance. In real-world scenarios, however, dif-
ferent outcomes are conceivable, as body composition, physical capacity, diet and exercise
can vary considerably based on individual conditions.

Keywords: intermittent fasting; body composition; calorie restriction; muscle strength;
exercise performance

1. Introduction

Intermittent fasting (IF) and calorie restriction (CR) have well-documented metabolic
benefits [1], but their relevance to sports nutrition and exercise performance remains un-
derexplored. IF, characterized by alternating periods of fasting and eating [2], encompasses
protocols such as time-restricted feeding (TRF) [3], alternate-day fasting (ADF) [4], the 5:2
diet [5], and Ramadan fasting [6]. These protocols vary in timing but share the goal of
inducing metabolic changes via caloric restriction and meal timing [7]. CR involves sus-
tained calorie reduction without changing meal frequency or compromising nutrition [8].
Both strategies improve insulin sensitivity, lipid profiles, and body composition [9,10].
These strategies are also of interest in sports nutrition, where their effects on performance,
strength, endurance, and recovery are being actively studied [11,12].

Both dietary strategies induce physiological changes that may either enhance or impair
exercise performance, depending on the circumstances. Fasting conditions promote ketoge-
nesis and alter substrate utilization, favoring fat oxidation over carbohydrate metabolism.
This shift may preserve glycogen, benefiting endurance sports [13]. Nonetheless, the
reduced energy availability associated with IF and CR may impair performance during
high-intensity activities (e.g., sprinting, heavy lifting) or anaerobic exercise, where glycogen
is the primary fuel source [2]. Prolonged deficits may impair muscle protein synthesis (MPS)
and alter hormones like insulin and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF−1), affecting strength,
recovery, and training adaptations [14]. In addition to physiological mechanisms, IF and CR
may also influence exercise performance through psychological and behavioral pathways.
Energy restriction may alter mood, motivation, and perceived exertion, impacting adher-
ence and performance [15]. Rigid timing or caloric limits in some IF/CR protocols may
cause disordered eating or reduced exercise enjoyment, especially long-term [16]. These
behavioral responses may vary depending on individual factors such as personality traits,
previous dieting history, and training experience, further contributing to the heterogeneity
in performance outcomes.

The timing of fasting relative to exercise is crucial, as consuming food before or
after exercise is essential for optimizing recovery and training outcomes. Training status
may influence how IF or CR affects performance. Evidence suggests that well-trained
athletes exhibit greater resistance to fasting-induced fatigue, potentially due to superior
adaptations in sleep quality, hydration management, and metabolic efficiency, thereby better
preserving their performance [17–19]. In contrast, amateur or less-trained individuals may
experience greater declines in performance, likely driven by increased fatigue from sleep
disturbances and dehydration during fasting periods [17]. Nonetheless, further research

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

3 of 43

is warranted to directly compare these populations and to optimize dietary and training
strategies accordingly.

Additionally, gender-specific responses to IF and CR have been well-documented in
humans. Research shows that women exhibit higher lipid metabolism and lower carbohy-
drate oxidation during fasting compared to men, a pattern that becomes more pronounced
with longer fasting durations (14–38 h) [20]. After a 38 h fast, women show higher plasma
free fatty acids and lower glucose, suggesting protection against insulin resistance [21].
The preferential use of lipids by women is largely attributed to estrogen, which promotes
lipid oxidation and spares muscle glycogen, thereby altering substrate utilization during
energy restriction [20]. These differences highlight the need to consider sex hormones and
menstrual cycles, yet many studies overlook them. While these physiological mechanisms
may explain the potential effects of IF and CR on exercise performance, their practical
implications remain unclear due to inconsistent findings in the scientific literature.

Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have shown that resistance training combined
with TRF compared to a standard diet over 8 weeks, can preserve fat-free mass (FFM) while
reducing fat mass (FM), without compromising muscle strength [22–24]. However, results
from other studies are mixed. While one study found no leg-press strength difference with
TRF [23], another reported improved lower-body strength and endurance, and upper-body
endurance [22]. A recent study found that one-week fasting reduced VO2 peak by 13%,
glycogen by ~50%, lean mass by 4.6 kg, and FM by 1.4 kg. However, neither muscle strength
(maximal isometric and isokinetic strength) nor oxidative enzymes in skeletal muscle were
affected [25]. Notably, one-week fasting did not affect skeletal muscle AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) activity, suggesting exercise adaptations may override fasting
effects. This study supports the rationale for further investigating and understanding
the effects of hypocaloric IF protocols combined with exercise on performance and body
composition [25].

Systematic reviews highlight considerable variability in research findings regarding
the effects of IF and CR on exercise performance. For instance, a meta-analysis of 28 studies
demonstrated that TRF protocols significantly improved maximal oxygen consumption,
while Ramadan fasting appeared to impair it. While strength and anaerobic capacity
were unaffected, Ramadan fasting reduced aerobic capacity, opposite to TRF’s reported
benefits [12]. A review of 25 studies found that IF can enhance body composition, preserve
lean mass, and improve maximal power [2]. Nevertheless, a subsequent systematic review
and meta-analysis of 11 studies found that Ramadan fasting had a detrimental effect on
mean and peak power during high-intensity activities, particularly in the morning, despite
having minimal effects on aerobic performance, strength, and jump height [17]. Similarly,
CR shows a dichotomy of outcomes. For example, a meta-analysis and meta-regression
demonstrated that CR can promote strength gains and increases in lean mass; however,
severe caloric deficits greater than 500 kcal/day may compromise muscle strength and
recovery [14]. These conflicting findings highlight the need for a comprehensive analysis to
determine whether IF and CR are beneficial, neutral, or detrimental to exercise performance.
Most studies on IF and CR are limited by small samples, varied populations, and dif-
fering protocols. This heterogeneity has hindered the development of clear, evidence-based
guidelines for athletes and practitioners looking to incorporate these dietary strategies into
their training regimens. This review aims to consolidate evidence on IF and CR combined
with exercise vs. exercise alone, focusing on endurance, strength, and body composition.

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

4 of 43

2. Methods
2.1. Trial Registration

The current systematic review and meta-analysis was registered in the PROSPERO
International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (ID: CRD42024622312; 15 De-
cember 2024) and conducted according to The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines [26], as well as the guidance provided in
the Cochrane Handbook of Systematic Reviews of Interventions [27].

2.2. Search Strategy

A thorough electronic search was performed across Scopus, Web of Science, and
PubMed databases. Two independent reviewers screened published articles up to April
2024, with no restrictions on publication date. The search was confined to English-language
articles involving human subjects. Detailed search strategies are provided in Supplementary
Table S1. All retrieved records were imported into EndNote, and duplicates were eliminated.
Titles, abstracts, and full texts were independently evaluated by two authors for eligibility,
with discrepancies resolved through discussion or consultation with a third reviewer. To
maximize coverage, reference lists of included studies were also screened for additional
relevant articles. Furthermore, supplementary searches were carried out in Google Scholar.
The search strategies used for each database are summarized in Supplementary Table S1.

2.3. Study Selection and Inclusion Criteria

Studies were included if the intervention duration was ≥4 weeks and involved various
types of exercise (aerobic training, high-intensity interval training [HIIT], or resistance
training). Eligible studies met the following criteria: (a) peer-reviewed, full-text articles,
and (b) trials assessing the effects of IF and CR combined with exercise vs. exercise alone
(control) on body weight, VO2max, exercise performance (including handgrip strength,
bench press strength, knee extensor strength, leg press strength, countermovement jump
[CMJ], 400 m walk test, and gait speed), and body composition (including body mass index
[BMI], FFM, FM, and body fat percentage [BFP]) in adults aged 18 to 65 years.

The process for selecting studies is shown in Figure 1. After eliminating duplicate stud-
ies, the titles and abstracts of articles were independently evaluated. Then, two reviewers
assessed the full texts of potentially eligible studies to determine their eligibility. Any dis-
agreements were resolved through discussion with a third author. The study characteristics
extracted included participant details (such as health status, age, biological sex, BMI, and
sample size), as well as information on IF, CR, exercise protocols, and intervention duration.

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

5 of 43

Figure 1. Flow diagram of systematic literature search.

2.4. Quality Assessment and Sensitivity Analyses

The assessment of potential bias was conducted using the PEDro (Physiother-
apy Evidence Database) tool [28]. Two items were omitted from the original 11-item
scale—blinding of participants and blinding of intervention providers—since neither par-
ticipants nor providers could be blinded to the assigned diet and exercise protocols in
the included studies. Consequently, a modified nine-item scale was used in this study,
encompassing: (1) clearly defined inclusion and exclusion criteria, (2) randomized al-
location of participants, (3) allocation concealment, (4) baseline group comparability,
(5) blinding of outcome assessors, (6) outcome assessment in at least 85% of participants,
(7) use of intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis, (8) reporting of statistical comparisons be-
tween groups, and (9) presentation of point estimates alongside measures of variability
(Supplementary Table S2). Sensitivity analyses were performed by systematically exclud-
ing one study at a time to evaluate the robustness of the results and the influence of
individual studies on the meta-analysis outcomes.

2.5. Statistical Analysis

Meta-analyses were conducted using Comprehensive Meta-Analysis version 2.0
(Biostat Inc., Englewood, NJ, USA). Weighted mean difference (WMD), standardized mean
difference (SMD), and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated to evaluate the out-
comes. All analyses employed random-effects models. Effect sizes were computed to
evaluate and compare the impacts of combining IF and CR with exercise versus exercise
alone on body weight, VO2max, exercise performance (including handgrip strength, bench
press strength, knee extensor strength, leg press strength, CMJ, 400 m walk test, and gait
speed), and body composition (BMI, FFM, FM, and BFP). Interpretation of effect sizes
was based on the following thresholds: 0.2–0.49 was considered a small effect, 0.5–0.79 a
moderate effect, and ≥0.80 a large effect. Heterogeneity among studies was assessed using
the I2 statistic, with statistical significance set at p < 0.05. According to Cochrane guidelines,
I2 values were interpreted as follows: <25% = low, 25–50% = moderate, 50–75% = high, and

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

6 of 43

≥75% = considerable heterogeneity [29]. The findings were synthesized using random-
effects models to account for potential clinical and methodological heterogeneity that may
have influenced the outcomes [30].

Publication bias was assessed through visual inspection of funnel plots. Where asym-
metry was detected, Egger’s regression test was conducted as a supplementary confir-
matory analysis. A p-value of <0.1 was considered indicative of significant publication
bias [29].

Subgroup analyses were performed based on age, type of diet (TRF, ADF, Ramadan in-
termittent fasting [RIF], or CR), intervention duration (short-term intervention ≤8 weeks, or
long-term intervention >8 weeks), diet frequency (≤3 days/week, or >3 days/week), type
of exercise (aerobic training, resistance training, or combined training), training frequency
(low-frequency as ≤3 sessions/week, or high-frequency as >3 sessions/week), intensity of
aerobic training (moderate-intensity as 40–80% VO2max, or high-intensity as >80% VO2max),
participant characteristics (trained, or untrained), and gender (female, or male).

3. Results
3.1. Included Studies

The initial search retrieved a total of 4242 records from PubMed, 11,083 records from
Scopus, and 6583 records from Web of Science. After removing duplicate records and
assessing the titles and abstracts, 197 studies were deemed relevant and underwent a
thorough evaluation of their full texts. Following the full-text assessment, 162 studies were
excluded for the following reasons: 81 studies did not include both an exercise and a diet
group, 75 studies did not measure primary outcome, 4 studies were review articles, one
study was a pilot study, and one study reported only post-test data. As a result, 35 studies
were included in this systematic review and meta-analysis, encompassing 39 intervention
groups involving the combination of IF and CR with exercise. The flow diagram of the
systematic literature search is depicted in Figure 1.

3.2. Participant Characteristics

A total of 1266 adults, with or without overweight and obesity, were included, with
sample sizes ranging from 15 [31] to 155 [32] participants. The participants’ ages ranged
from 18 years [33] to 80 years [34], and BMI values ranged from 21 kg·m−2 [35,36] to
35 kg·m−2 [37]. A total of 35 studies were included in the analysis. Among them, 13 studies
had both male and female participants [32,34,37–46], 16 studies exclusively included male
participants [22,23,31,33,35,36,47–56], and 6 studies only included female participants [57–62].
The participants’ health status varied across the studies: some studies included healthy
participants [32,34,37–46,53,57–62], while others focused on participants with overweight
and obesity [22,23,31,33,35,36,47–52,54–56] (Table 1).

Non-Fasting/Non-
Calorie Restriction
Control Eating

Exercise
Characteristics

Energy Intake
(kcal/Day)

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

Table 1. Study, participant, and intervention characteristics.

Source,
Year

Study Characteristics

Participant Characteristics

Sample
Size (Sex)

Groups

Intervention
Duration
(Weeks)

Outcomes

Health
Status

Age (Years)
Mean ± SD

BMI (kg·m−2)
Mean ± SD

Ballor et al.,
1988 [57]

20 F

Exe + CR
Exe alone

Batitucci
et al.,
2022 [58]

26 F

TRF + Exe
Exe alone

Bouhlel et al.,
2013 [35]

20 M

RIF + Exe
Exe alone

8

8

4

Obesity

Exe + CR
32.9 ± 1.5
Exe alone:
32.9 ± 1.5

Exe + CR:
-
Exe alone:
-

Obesity

TRF + Exe:
32.2 ± 4.4
Exe alone:
33 ± 3.0

TRF + Exe:
34 ± 3.2
Exe alone:
31.8 ± 2.02

Chest press
strength
FM
FFM
BFP
BW

Leg press
strength
Chest press
strength
Handgrip
strength
VO2max
BFP
BMI
BW

Vertical
jump
Handgrip
strength
BMI
BW

Healthy
partici-
pants
(physical
education
students)
Trained

RIF + Exe:
21.8 ± 1.9
Exe alone:
21.8 ± 1.9

RIF + Exe:
22.4 ± 1.9
Exe alone:
21.4 ± 2.2

Intermittent
Fasting/Calorie
Restriction
Characteristics

Energy needs were
estimated based on
body metrics and
activity level, then
reduced by
1000 kcal/day. The
final intake
averaged 2200–2500
kcal/day. The diet
provided 50%
carbohydrate, 27%
protein, 23% fat, and
included a daily
protein supplement.

The 5:2 intermittent
fasting protocol was
implemented twice
weekly on
non-consecutive
days over 8 weeks.
Each fasting day
followed a 6:18
schedule, allowing
two meals within a
6 h window,
followed by 18 h of
complete fasting

During Ramadan,
participants
consumed their last
meal between 8:00
and 9:00 p.m. and
fasted daily from
5:00 a.m. to
approximately 6:30
p.m.

In the Exe alone group,
participants were
asked to keep their
usual dietary intake
unchanged.

The Exe alone group
was instructed to
maintain their habitual
diet during the
intervention.

NR

Participants
performed bench
press, leg press, lat
pulldown, biceps curl,
triceps extension, calf
raise, leg extension,
and hamstring curl,
following the protocol
by Sprague and
Reynolds. Each
exercise was
performed three times
per week: 2 sets of
10 reps, followed by a
third set to voluntary
fatigue

HIIT was performed
three times per week
for 8 weeks, with each
225 min session
including a 4 min
warm-up, 18 min of
intervals at 70–85%
HRmax (30–45 s effort,
15–30 s recovery), and
a 3 min cool-down.

They engaged in 16 h
per week of training
across various sports,
including soccer,
handball, basketball,
volleyball, gymnastics,
and athletics.

7 of 43

Hypocaloric
Diet/Eucaloric
Diet

Hypocaloric diet

A daily caloric
deficit of 1000 kcal
was applied to
baseline needs,
estimated at
2200–2500 kcal/day.

1700–1800 kcal/day

Hypocaloric diet

NR

Hypocaloric diet
(10% reduction in
calorie intake)

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

Table 1. Cont.

Source,
Year

Study Characteristics

Participant Characteristics

Sample
Size (Sex)

Groups

Intervention
Duration
(Weeks)

Outcomes

Health
Status

Age (Years)
Mean ± SD

BMI (kg·m−2)
Mean ± SD

Brady et al.,
2021 [47]

17 M

TRF + Exe
Exe alone

Brini et al.,
2019 [48]

16 M

RIF + SSG
SSG
RIF + RSA
RSA

Brini et al.,
2020 [49]

24 M

RIF + Exe
Exe alone

8

4

4

VO2peak
FM
FFM
BW

SJ
CMJ
BFP
BMI

BFP
BMI
BW

Healthy
partici-
pants
(Middle
and long-
distance
runners)
Trained

Healthy
partici-
pants
(Basketball
players)
Trained

Healthy
partici-
pants
(Basketball
players)
Trained

8 of 43

Hypocaloric
Diet/Eucaloric
Diet

Hypocaloric diet

The average daily
energy intake in the
TRF group declined
by
5.2 ± 3.6 kcal/kg/day
from PRE to MID.

NR

Eucaloric diet

RIF + Exe: 2741.66 ±
172.98 kcal/day
Exe alone: 2829.17 ±
73.04 kcal/day

Hypocaloric diet
(20% reduction in
calorie intake)

Exercise
Characteristics

Energy Intake
(kcal/Day)

Intermittent
Fasting/Calorie
Restriction
Characteristics

Participants were
directed to eat all
meals within an 8 h
period, usually from
12:00 to 20:00, with
only water allowed
outside this
window.

During the
Ramadan phase,
participants fasted
from dawn until
sunset, abstaining
from both food and
drink.

TRF + Exe:
35.9 ± 8.6
Exe alone:
39.9 ± 3

TRF + Exe:
NR
Exe alone: NR

RIF + SSG:
23.4 ± 2.3
SSG:
23.4 ± 2.3
RIF + RSA:
23.4 ± 2.3
RSA:
23.4 ± 2.3

RIF + SSG:
22.6 ± 1.95
SSG:
22.6 ± 1.95
RIF + RSA:
22.6 ± 1.95
RSA:
22.6 ± 1.95

RIF + Exe:
25.32 ± 2.56
Exe alone:
24.85 ± 1.55

RIF + Exe:
23.43 ± 1.19
Exe alone:
23.41 ± 1.46

Participants fasted
for roughly 16–17 h
each day.

Non-Fasting/Non-
Calorie Restriction
Control Eating

Participants were
advised to maintain
their usual dietary
habits throughout the
intervention period.

Participants
maintained stable
nutrition and
hydration routines,
consuming customary
Iftar and Sahur meals
in proximity to each
testing session.

Participants
documented all meals
consumed during the
study, including the
quantity and type of
food and beverages.
Additionally, a
nutritionist conducted
interviews and
analyzed their records.

Participants were
required to be current
competitors in middle-
and long-distance
events (≥1500 m) and
to self-report training a
minimum of five days
weekly.

Players from the same
basketball team
followed SSG and RSA
protocols based on
their group allocation
(GSSG and GRSA),
with sessions
scheduled at least 24 h
apart, twice per week.

Training sessions
began with a 115 min
warm-up, followed by
technical and tactical
drills focusing on
fundamental and
basketball-specific
movements, including
defense. Both groups
completed
approximately 90 min
per session, three
times per week.

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

Table 1. Cont.

Source,
Year

Study Characteristics

Participant Characteristics

Sample
Size (Sex)

Groups

Intervention
Duration
(Weeks)

Outcomes

Health
Status

Age (Years)
Mean ± SD

BMI (kg·m−2)
Mean ± SD

BMI
BW

Professional
male
basketball
players

RIF + Exe:
25.32 ± 2.56
Exe alone:
24.85 ± 1.55

RIF + Exe:
23.43 ± 1.19
Exe alone:
23.41 ± 1.46

Intermittent
Fasting/Calorie
Restriction
Characteristics

Non-Fasting/Non-
Calorie Restriction
Control Eating

Ramadan
intermittent fasting

Normal diet

Exercise
Characteristics

Energy Intake
(kcal/Day)

RIF + Exe:
2741.66 ± 172.98
Exe alone:
2829.17 ± 73.04

9 of 43

Hypocaloric
Diet/Eucaloric
Diet

Eucaloric diet

Brini et al.,
2021 [50]

24 M

RIF + Exe
Exe alone

Brisswalter
et al.,
2011 [51]

18 M

RIF + Exe
Exe alone

4

4

VO2max
BW

Healthy
partici-
pants
(well-
trained
runners)
Trained

RIF + Exe:
23.6 ± 2.9
Exe alone:
23.6 ± 2.9

RIF + Exe:
NR
Exe alone:
NR

Ramadan
intermittent fasting

Normal diet

NR

Eucaloric diet

Training sessions
started with a 15 min
warm-up program,
followed by technical
and tactical drills
based on basic
basketball movements,
specific basketball
movements, and basic
defensive movements,
Both groups
completed the same
training volume
(~90 min per session).
3 day/week

Training consisted of
(1) 30 min of slow
running followed by
intervals of 30 s
running and 30 s rest
at maximal aerobic
speed (100% MAS),
(2) a continuous 30
min run at 100% MAS,
and (3) 20 min of slow
running at the athlete’s
individual
competition speed,
conducted three times
weekly.

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

Table 1. Cont.

Source,
Year

Study Characteristics

Participant Characteristics

Sample
Size (Sex)

Groups

Intervention
Duration
(Weeks)

Outcomes

Health
Status

Age (Years)
Mean ± SD

BMI (kg·m−2)
Mean ± SD

Cho et al.,
2019 [63]

18 M&F

ADF + Exe
Exe alone

8

Obesity

ADF + Exe:
34.5 ± 5.7
Exe alone:
38.6 ± 8.2

ADF + Exe:
28 ± 2.6
Exe alone:
26.9 ± 3.9

Chest press
strength
Leg press
strength
VO2max
FM
BFP
BMI
BW

Christiansen
et al.,
2010 [38]

40 M&F

CR + Exe
Exe alone

12

VO2max
BMI
BW

Obesity

CR + Exe:
37.5 ± 8
Exe alone:
37.2 ± 7

CR + Exe:
34.2 ± 3
Exe alone:
33.4 ± 4

Non-Fasting/Non-
Calorie Restriction
Control Eating

Control group
participants were
instructed to maintain
their usual diet.

NR

Intermittent
Fasting/Calorie
Restriction
Characteristics

During the 8-week
intervention,
ADF + Exe
participants
consumed about
25% of their daily
energy needs
(~500 kcal) on each
fast day (24 h) and
ate freely on feed
days (24 h). Fast and
feed days alternated
every other day,
with fast days
occurring three
times weekly. On
fast days,
participants were
instructed to eat a
single meal between
12 p.m. and 2 p.m.
to standardize
fasting periods

Participants in the
CR + Exe group
were assigned a
daily intake of
800 kcal.

10 of 43

Hypocaloric
Diet/Eucaloric
Diet

Hypocaloric diet

Exercise
Characteristics

Energy Intake
(kcal/Day)

ADF + Exe: 1785.9
± 311.3 kcal/day
Exe alone: 1532.8 ±
410.4 kcal/day

Resistance training
sessions lasted 40 min
and involved weight
machines, barbells,
and dumbbells.
Intensity was tailored
to each participant’s
muscle strength and
progressively
increased weekly.
Aerobic training
consisted of 20 min on
motorized treadmills,
with intensity set
according to
individual maximal
oxygen consumption.
Both training types
were performed three
times per week.

Participants
completed supervised
aerobic training three
times weekly, each
session lasting
60–75 min, with an
estimated energy
expenditure of
500–600 kcal per
session.

Hypocaloric diet

Participants in the
DIO and DEX
groups
600 and 800 kcal/day
for 8 weeks
followed by a
weight maintenance
diet for 4 weeks. The
participants in the
DEX group were
allowed to consume
150–200 kcal more
per day compared
with the DIO group

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

11 of 43

Table 1. Cont.

Source,
Year

Study Characteristics

Participant Characteristics

Sample
Size (Sex)

Groups

Intervention
Duration
(Weeks)

Outcomes

Health
Status

Age (Years)
Mean ± SD

BMI (kg·m−2)
Mean ± SD

Coker et al.,
2009 [39]

17 M&F

CR + Exe
Exe alone

12

Obesity

VO2peak
BFP
BMI
BW

CR + Exe:
54 ± 6
Exe alone:
55 ± 5.64

CR + Exe:
32 ± 3
Exe alone:
32 ± 2.82

Cooke et al.,
2022 [40]

22 M&F

TRF + Exe
Exe alone

8
16

Obesity

VO2peak
FM
FFM
BW

TRF + Exe:
39 ± 6.8
Exe alone:
32 ± 8.3

TRF + Exe:
34 ± 2.1
Exe alone:
32 ± 4.4

Correia et al.,
2023 [52]

18 M

TRF + Exe
Exe alone

4

CMJ
SJ
FM
FFM
BW

Healthy
partici-
pants
Trained

TRF + Exe:
23.7 ± 2.6
Exe alone:
23.7 ± 2.6

TRF + Exe: NR
Exe alone: NR

Intermittent
Fasting/Calorie
Restriction
Characteristics

Caloric restriction
began with a
1000 kcal reduction
in the first week,
followed by weekly
decreases of 500 kcal
until reaching a total
weekly deficit of
2500 kcal.

The 5:2 IF group
restricted energy
intake on two
non-consecutive
days per week for
16 weeks,
consuming ad
libitum on the other
five days. On fasting
days, men and
women consumed a
single meal of
600 kcal and
500 kcal,
respectively, along
with unlimited
water and
unsweetened black
tea.

During TRF,
participants ate two
to three ad libitum
meals within an 8 h
window (1–9 p.m.),
consuming only
water, tea, and black
coffee outside this
period.

Non-Fasting/Non-
Calorie Restriction
Control Eating

Exercise
Characteristics

Energy Intake
(kcal/Day)

Hypocaloric
Diet/Eucaloric
Diet

NR

NR

During the Exe-only
condition, participants
consumed 100% of
their energy
requirements and
maintained their usual
dietary habits.

Training intensity was
prescribed at 50% of
participants’ peak
oxygen consumption.

SIT involved
supervised sessions of
4 × 20 s efforts at 150%
VO2peak, each
followed by 40 s of
active rest at 50 watts
on a magnetic braked
cycle ergometer. The
number of intervals
increased from four to
six during the first
four weeks and stayed
at six thereafter.
Sessions included
3 min warm-up and
cool-down periods,
performed three times
per week.

Participants followed
a structured training
program during each
dietary intervention,
performing four sets of
8–10 repetitions at 85%
of their 1-RM on leg
press, bench press, leg
extension, leg curl,
shoulder press, and lat
pulldown, three times
per week.

NR

Hypocaloric diet

NR

Hypocaloric diet

Eucaloric diet

Before TRF + Exe:
2433.3 ± 760.5
kcal/day
Before Exe alone:
2427 ± 556.8
kcal/day

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

Table 1. Cont.

Source,
Year

Study Characteristics

Participant Characteristics

Sample
Size (Sex)

Groups

Intervention
Duration
(Weeks)

Outcomes

Health
Status

Age (Years)
Mean ± SD

BMI (kg·m−2)
Mean ± SD

Correia et al.,
2024 [31]

15 M

TRF + Exe
Exe alone

4

VO2max
FM
FFM
BW

Healthy
partici-
pants
Trained

TRF + Exe:
23.7 ± 2.6
Exe alone:
23.7 ± 2.6

TRF + Exe: Exe
alone: NR

Intermittent
Fasting/Calorie
Restriction
Characteristics

The TRF
intervention used a
16/8 protocol,
where participants
consumed
2 to 3 meals within
an 8 h window
(1:00–9:00 p.m.) and
were allowed only
water, tea, and black
coffee outside this
period.

12 of 43

Hypocaloric
Diet/Eucaloric
Diet

Eucaloric diet

Non-Fasting/Non-
Calorie Restriction
Control Eating

Exercise
Characteristics

Energy Intake
(kcal/Day)

During the Exe-only
condition, participants
were asked to maintain
their usual dietary
habits without any
restrictions on meal
timing throughout the
intervention.

TRF + Exe:
2311 ± 681 kcal/day
Exe alone:
2285 ± 659kcal/day

Cox et al.,
2004 [53]

30 M

CR + High
intensity
Exe
High
intensity
Exe
CR + Low
intensity
Exe
Low
intensity
Exe

16

Overweight
partici-
pants

VO2max
FM
FFM
BMI
BW

CR + High
intensity Exe:
41.1 ± 5.4
High
intensity Exe:
43 ± 4.2
CR + Low
intensity Exe:
41.1 ± 5.4
Low
intensity Exe:
43 ± 4.2

CR + High
intensity Exe:
33.3 ± 3.6
High intensity
Exe: 30.5 ± 3.9
CR + Low
intensity Exe:
33.3 ± 3.6
Low intensity
Exe: 30.5 ± 3.9

Participants
decreased their
daily energy intake
by 1000 to 1500 kcal.

Control participants
were instructed to
keep their regular
dietary habits.

Hypocaloric diet

Participants in the
other two groups
followed
personalized
programs targeting
a daily energy
intake reduction of
1000 to 1500 kcal.

During the first
2 weeks of the
intervention,
participants
completed 10 km runs
per session with 24 h of
rest between workouts.
In the final 2 weeks,
they continued the
10-km runs and added
1 km running intervals
after each continuous
run, separated by
4 min of active
recovery, totaling
approximately 39 km
per week. Sessions
were performed three
times per week.

The exercise consisted
solely of stationary
cycling, with
participants cycling for
30 min at 60–70% of
their maximum
workload, as
determined by their
fitness assessment.
Each session included
a 5 min warm-up and a
5-min cool-down,
performed three times
per week.

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

Table 1. Cont.

Source,
Year

Habermann
et al.,
2015 [59]

Study Characteristics

Participant Characteristics

Sample
Size (Sex)

Groups

Intervention
Duration
(Weeks)

Outcomes

Health
Status

Age (Years)
Mean ± SD

BMI (kg·m−2)
Mean ± SD

120 F

CR + Exe
Exe alone

52

VO2max
BW

Postmenop-
ausal
women
with
obesity/
overweight

CR + Exe:
58.4 ± 4.7
Exe alone:
59.1 ± 5.1

CR + Exe:
31.2 ± 4.5
Exe alone:
30.5 ± 3.6

Non-Fasting/Non-
Calorie Restriction
Control Eating

Participants were
instructed to maintain
their usual dietary
habits.

Intermittent
Fasting/Calorie
Restriction
Characteristics

The diet targeted a
daily energy intake
of 1200–2000 kcal,
adjusted by weight,
with less than 30%
of calories from fat.
The goal was to
achieve a 10%
weight loss within
6 months, followed
by maintenance.

Hagan et al.,
1986 [41]

24 M
24 F

CR + Exe
(male)
Exe alone
(male)
CR + Exe
(female)
Exe alone
(female)

12

VO2max
FM
FFM
BW

Overweight

Haganes
et al.,
2022 [60]

52 F

TRF + Exe
Exe alone

7

VO2peak
FM
BW

Obesity

M
CR + Exe:
34.4 ± 5.6
Exe alone:
33.9 ± 7.6
F
CR + Exe:
34.2 ± 6.5
Exe alone:
37.2 ± 7.4

TRF + Exe:
37.3 ± 5.7
Exe alone:
34.9 ± 7

NR

Intake was limited
to 1200 kcal per day.

Participants continued
their usual dietary
habits.

TRF + Exe:
31.4 ± 4
Exe alone:
32.5 ± 4.5

In the TRF + Exe
group, participants
restricted their
energy intake to a
maximum 10 h
eating window each
day.

NR

Participants engaged
in three supervised
treadmill workouts
per week.

13 of 43

Hypocaloric
Diet/Eucaloric
Diet

Hypocaloric diet

Exercise
Characteristics

Energy Intake
(kcal/Day)

The diet had a total
energy intake goal
of
1200–2000 kcal/day
based on weight

The exercise
intervention aimed for
45 min of
moderate-to-vigorous
activity. Participants
attended three
supervised sessions
per week and
exercised twice weekly
at home. Training
duration increased
from 15 min at 60–70%
of maximal heart rate
to 70–85% by week 7,
which was then
maintained. Facility
sessions included
treadmill walking,
stationary cycling, and
other aerobic
machines, performed
five days per week.

Aerobic training was
performed for 30 min
per session, five days
per week.

NR

Hypocaloric diet

Eucaloric diet

During the baseline
week, total daily
energy intake
averaged
2066 ± 484 kcal in
the TRF group,
1996 ± 387 kcal in
the Exe alone group,
1943 ± 346 kcal in
the TRF + Exe group,
and 2056 ± 433 kcal
in the Exe alone
group.

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

Table 1. Cont.

Source,
Year

Hammer
et al.,
1989 [61]

Study Characteristics

Participant Characteristics

Sample
Size (Sex)

Groups

Intervention
Duration
(Weeks)

20 F

CR + Exe
Exe alone

4
16

Outcomes

Health
Status

Age (Years)
Mean ± SD

BMI (kg·m−2)
Mean ± SD

Obesity

VO2max
FFM
BFP
BW

CR + Exe:
33 ± 8
Exe alone:
32 ± 7

CR + Exe:
32.2 ± 7.8
Exe alone:
31.3 ± 6.7

Jefferson
et al.,
2016 [42]

32 M&F

CR + Exe
Exe alone

20

Obesity

CR + Exe:
69 ± 3
Exe alone:
68 ± 3

CR + Exe:
30.7 ± 2.5
Exe alone:
31 ± 2.7

Knee
extensor
strength
FM
FFM
BFP
BMI
BW

Non-Fasting/Non-
Calorie Restriction
Control Eating

No effort was made to
restrict calories in the
Exe group

The Exe alone group
was asked to maintain
their usual diet during
the intervention.

Intermittent
Fasting/Calorie
Restriction
Characteristics

Participants in the
CR + Exe group
followed an
800 kcal/day
exchange list diet,
with specified
servings for each
food group. The CR
diet was set at an 800
kcal daily intake.

Participants were
guided to decrease
their daily energy
intake by about
600 kcal below
estimated
expenditure, aiming
for a 5–10% weight
loss.

Participants started
the first week by
walking or jogging
1.6 km per session.
The distance increased
by 0.8 km each week
until reaching 4.8 km,
which was maintained
for the rest of the study.
Exercise intensity was
set between 70 and
85% of HRmax,
performed five days
per week.

Upper and lower body
exercises were
performed on different
machines, with
intensity set at 70% of
1RM. Exercise volume
and intensity
gradually increased
over the first month,
conducted three times
per week.

14 of 43

Hypocaloric
Diet/Eucaloric
Diet

Hypocaloric diet

Exercise
Characteristics

Energy Intake
(kcal/Day)

The estimated
caloric deficits were
1203 kcal/day

NR

Hypocaloric diet

Kirkendall
et al.,
2008 [33]

85 M

RIF + Exe
Exe alone

4

Vertical
jump

RIF + Exe:
18
Exe alone:
18

RIF + Exe: 22.4
Exe alone: 22.4

Participants were
instructed to adhere
to fasting protocols
throughout the
month of Ramadan.

Participants were
instructed not to fast
during that period.

Healthy
partici-
pants
(young
football
players)
Trained

NR

NR

Eucaloric diet

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

Source,
Year

Kotarsky
et al.,
2021 [43]

Table 1. Cont.

Study Characteristics

Participant Characteristics

Sample
Size (Sex)

Groups

Intervention
Duration
(Weeks)

21 M&F

TRF + Exe
Exe alone

8

Outcomes

Health
Status

Age (Years)
Mean ± SD

BMI (kg·m−2)
Mean ± SD

Obesity

TRF + Exe:
45 ± 3
Exe alone:
44 ± 2

TRF + Exe:
29.8 ± 0.8
Exe alone:
29.4 ± 0.8

Handgrip
strength
Knee
extensor
strength
FM
FFM
BMI
BW

Intermittent
Fasting/Calorie
Restriction
Characteristics

TRF + Exe
participants
consumed all
calories daily
between 12:00 p.m.
and 8:00 p.m.,
creating a 16 h
fasting window.
During fasting, TRF
participants were
advised to drink
only water, black
coffee, or tea.

Non-Fasting/Non-
Calorie Restriction
Control Eating

Exercise
Characteristics

Energy Intake
(kcal/Day)

Exe alone participants
were instructed to
keep their usual eating
patterns.

A modest but
significant energy
restriction occurred
from
pre-intervention to
week 7, with
approximately
300 kcal/day
(14.5%) in the TRF
group and 250
kcal/day (11.4%) in
the Exe group.

15 of 43

Hypocaloric
Diet/Eucaloric
Diet

Hypocaloric diet

Moro et al.,
2016 [23]

34 M

TRF + Exe
Exe alone

8

Chest press
strength
Leg press
strength
FM
FFM

Healthy
partici-
pants
(Resistance
trained)
Trained

TRF + Exe:
29.94 ± 4.07
Exe alone:
28.47 ± 3.48

TRF + Exe:
NR
Exe alone:
NR

TRF participants
met 100% of their
energy needs
through three meals
at 1 p.m., 4 p.m., and
8 p.m., fasting for
the remaining 16 h
each day.

The Exe alone group
distributed their daily
caloric intake across
three meals, which
were consumed at
approximately 8:00
a.m., 1:00 p.m., and
8:00 p.m.

Eucaloric diet

TRF: 2826 ± 412.3
kcal/day,
carbohydrates
53.2 ± 1.4%, fat
24.7 ± 3.1%, protein
22.1 ± 2.6%, CON:
3007 ± 444.7 kcal/day,

carbohydrates
54.7 ± 2.2%, fat
23.9 ± 3.5%, protein
21.4 ± 1.8%

Resistance training
included three sets of
12 reps with up to 60 s
rest between sets.
Load was based on a
percentage of body
weight and adjusted
via trial loads,
performed three times
per week.
Aerobic training
consisted of 75 min at
moderate-to-vigorous
intensity (≥55% HRR)
on a treadmill or
similar equipment.
Intensity was
increased by 5–10%
during weeks 5 and 7
to ensure progression.
Sessions were
performed
immediately after
resistance training,
three times per week.

Participants engaged
in a split resistance
training routine,
completing three
weekly sessions. Each
session comprised
three sets of 6–8 reps at
85–90% of 1-RM,
performed to failure
with 3 min rest
intervals between sets
and exercises.

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

Table 1. Cont.

Source,
Year

Study Characteristics

Participant Characteristics

Sample
Size (Sex)

Groups

Intervention
Duration
(Weeks)

Outcomes

Health
Status

Age (Years)
Mean ± SD

BMI (kg·m−2)
Mean ± SD

Moro et al.,
2020 [36]

16 M

TRF + Exe
Exe alone

4

VO2peak
FFM
BW

Healthy
partici-
pants (Elite
cyclists)
Trained

TRF + Exe:
19.38 ± 2.39
Exe alone:
19.38 ± 1.60

TRF + Exe:
21.85 ± 1.65
Exe alone:
22.47 ± 1.83

Moro et al.,
2021 [54]

20 M

TRF + Exe
Exe alone

8
52

Healthy
partici-
pants
Trained

TRF + Exe:
NR
Exe alone:
NR

TRF + Exe: NR
Exe alone: NR

Chest press
strength
Leg press
strength
FM
FFM
BW

16 of 43

Hypocaloric
Diet/Eucaloric
Diet

Eucaloric diet

Eucaloric diet

Intermittent
Fasting/Calorie
Restriction
Characteristics

Participants in the
TRF group were
advised to consume
their entire daily
caloric requirement
across four eating
occasions, including
the three main
meals, within an 8 h
feeding window.

The TRF group was
instructed to meet
their total daily
energy
requirements
through three meals
consumed within an
8 h eating window
(approximately at
1 p.m., 4 p.m., and
8 p.m.), followed by
a 116 h fasting
period.

Non-Fasting/Non-
Calorie Restriction
Control Eating

Participants in the Exe
group consumed their
daily caloric intake
following a
conventional meal
timing schedule.

Participants in the Exe
group followed their
usual meal pattern,
consuming their total
daily energy intake
across three meals
spread over an
approximately 12 h
period (~8 a.m., 1 p.m.,
and 8 p.m.).

Exercise
Characteristics

Energy Intake
(kcal/Day)

This investigation was
carried out during the
winter
pre-competition phase.
The athletes followed a
structured training
regimen comprising
approximately
500 ± 50 km per week,
distributed across six
sessions, all conducted
within the designated
feeding period
(10:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.).

Throughout the
experimental period,
training intensity
varied between 75%
and 90% of 1 RM to
cycle between strength
and hypertrophy
phases. Sessions were
scheduled between
4:00 and 6:00 p.m. to
align with the eating
window for both
groups, occurring
three times per week.

All participants
adhered to an
identical 7-day
dietary regimen,
with a fixed daily
caloric intake of
4800 kcal.

In the TRF group,
energy intake was
allocated as 40% at
breakfast, 25% at
lunch, and 35% at
dinner, while
participants
following a normal
diet (ND) consumed
25%, 40%, and 35%,
respectively.
Additionally, all
participants
ingested 20 g of
whey protein 30 min
post-exercise.

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

17 of 43

Table 1. Cont.

Source,
Year

Study Characteristics

Participant Characteristics

Sample
Size (Sex)

Groups

Intervention
Duration
(Weeks)

Outcomes

Health
Status

Age (Years)
Mean ± SD

BMI (kg·m−2)
Mean ± SD

Nicklas et al.,
2015 [44]

111 M&F

CR + Exe
Exe alone

20

Overweight
and obesity

CR + Exe:
69.6 ± 3.9
Exe alone:
69.4 ± 3.6

CR + Exe:
30.4 ± 2.2
Exe alone:
30.7 ± 2.4

Handgrip
strength
Knee
extensor
strength
400 m walk
test
Gait speed
FM
FFM
BFP
BW

Nicklas et al.,
2019 [32]

155 M&F

20

Mod-CR +
Exe
High-CR +
Exe
Exe alone

Obesity

VO2peak
400 m walk
test
Gait speed
FM
FFM
BFP
BW

Mod-CR +
Exe:
68.8 ± 3.1
High-CR +
Exe:
69.6 ± 3.8
Exe alone:
69.1 ± 3.7

Mod-CR + Exe:
34.7 ± 3.7
High-CR + Exe:
34.4 ± 3.7
Exe alone:
34.6 ± 3.1

Intermittent
Fasting/Calorie
Restriction
Characteristics

Each participant
received an
individualized daily
caloric target,
calculated by
deducting 600 kcal
from their estimated
energy
requirements for
weight maintenance.
Up to two meal
replacements per
day (shakes and
bars; Slim-Fast
Inc.)—each
providing
approximately
220 kcal with 7–10 g
protein, 33–46 g
carbohydrates,
1.5–5 g fat, and 2–5 g
fiber—were
supplied for
breakfast and lunch.

Participants in the
calorie restriction
(CR) groups
received two meals
per day (lunch and
dinner), collected
thrice weekly. Their
prescribed caloric
intake was
calculated by
reducing their
estimated daily
energy
requirements for
weight maintenance
by either 250 kcal
(moderate CR) or
600 kcal (high CR).

Non-Fasting/Non-
Calorie Restriction
Control Eating

Exercise
Characteristics

Energy Intake
(kcal/Day)

Hypocaloric
Diet/Eucaloric
Diet

NR

Hypocaloric diet

Hypocaloric diet

No female
participant received
less than
1100 kcal/day, and
no male participant
received less than
1300 kcal/day.

Participants in the
resistance training
only group were
instructed to maintain
a eucaloric diet
throughout the
intervention.

Participants in the Exe
alone group were
instructed to continue
their usual dietary
habits throughout the
intervention.

The training protocol
aimed for participants
to perform 3 sets of
10 repetitions per
exercise at 70% of their
one-repetition
maximum (1 RM). Rest
intervals between sets
were approximately
one minute.
Resistance was
progressively
increased when a
participant
successfully
completed
10 repetitions in the
third set across
two consecutive
sessions. Strength
assessments were
conducted every four
weeks to recalibrate
training loads,
ensuring alignment
with the 70% 1 RM
target. Training
sessions occurred
three times per week.

Aerobic training was
conducted on
treadmills, beginning
with a slow-paced
walking warm-up.
Training duration
increased from
15 to 20 min at 50%
heart rate reserve
(HRR) during the first
week to 30 min at
65–70% HRR by week
six. Sessions were
performed four times
per week.

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

18 of 43

Table 1. Cont.

Source,
Year

Nieman
et al.,
2000 [62]

Study Characteristics

Participant Characteristics

Sample
Size (Sex)

Groups

43 F

CR + Exe
Exe alone

Intervention
Duration
(Weeks)

12 weeks

Outcomes

Health
Status

Age (Years)
Mean ± SD

BMI (kg·m−2)
Mean ± SD

VO2max
BFP
BW

Obesity

CR + Exe:
45.6 ± 1.1
Exe alone:
43.2 ± 2.3

CR + Exe:
33.1 ± 0.62
Exe alone:
33.1 ± 0.62

Stratton et al.,
2020 [55]

26 M

TRF + Exe
Exe alone

4

Healthy
partici-
pants
Trained

TRF + Exe:
22.9 ± 3.6
Exe alone:
22.5 ± 2.2

TRF + Exe: NR
Exe alone: NR

Vertical
Jump
Chest press
strength
Leg press
strength
FM
BFP
BW

Intermittent
Fasting/Calorie
Restriction
Characteristics

Participants with
obesity followed a
4.19 to 5.44 MJ/day
(1200 to 1300 kcal)
diet for 12 weeks.
The meal plan was
structured using
dietary exchanges,
including
two servings of
fruit, three of
vegetables, two of
dairy, six of grains,
two of fats, five of
lean protein, and
100 kcal of optional
foods.

The TRF + Exe
group consumed all
calories and
macronutrients
within an 8 h daily
window while
adhering to a
prescribed 25%
caloric deficit.

Non-Fasting/Non-
Calorie Restriction
Control Eating

Exercise
Characteristics

Energy Intake
(kcal/Day)

Hypocaloric
Diet/Eucaloric
Diet

1884 ± 84 kcal/day

Hypocaloric diet

NR

Hypocaloric diet

NR

Exe alone group
followed their usual
daily feeding schedule
while maintaining a
prescribed 25% caloric
deficit.

Participants were
instructed to walk for
45 min per session at
60% to 80% of their
maximum heart rate
over a 12-week period,
totaling 60 exercise
sessions. Exercise
duration and intensity
were progressively
increased during the
initial 3 weeks, starting
from 25 to 30 min per
session at 60% to 65%
MHR in week one,
reaching 45 min at 70%
to 80% MHR from
weeks 4 to 12. Sessions
were conducted
five days per week.

Resistance training
sessions included
1–2 min of rest
between sets. Exercise
loads were determined
based on
pre-intervention
estimated 1 RM
percentages, and all
exercises were
performed within a
specified
repetitions-in-reserve
range. Training
occurred three times
per week.

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

Table 1. Cont.

Source,
Year

Study Characteristics

Participant Characteristics

Sample
Size (Sex)

Groups

Intervention
Duration
(Weeks)

Outcomes

Health
Status

Age (Years)
Mean ± SD

BMI (kg·m−2)
Mean ± SD

Tinsley et al.,
2017 [22]

18 M

TRF + Exe
Exe alone

Tovar et al.,
2021 [56]

15 M

TRF + Exe
Exe alone

4
8

4

Chest press
strength
FM
FFM
BFP
BW

VO2max
HR
FM
FFM
BFP
BW

Healthy
partici-
pants
Trained

TRF + Exe:
22.9 ± 4.1
Exe alone:
22.0 ± 2.4

TRF + Exe: NR
Exe alone: NR

Healthy
partici-
pants
Trained

TRF + Exe:
28.7 ± 5.2
Exe alone:
28.7 ± 5.2

TRF + Exe: NR
Exe alone: NR

19 of 43

Hypocaloric
Diet/Eucaloric
Diet

Eucaloric diet

Non-Fasting/Non-
Calorie Restriction
Control Eating

Participants in the Exe
alone group were
instructed to maintain
their habitual dietary
habits throughout the
study.

Exercise
Characteristics

Energy Intake
(kcal/Day)

TRF + Exe:
1631 ± 563 kcal/day
Exe alone:
2318 ± 977 kcal/day

Participants
performed alternating
upper and lower body
workouts, completing
four sets of
8–12 repetitions per
exercise, with 90 s of
rest between sets, three
times per week.

Under the 12/12
protocol, participants
were instructed to
consume all their
calories within a
consistent, self-chosen
12 h daily window.

The weekly schedule
consisted of one day
with high-intensity
exercise, one day with
moderate-intensity
exercise, one day with
low-intensity exercise,
and one rest day,
totaling three exercise
sessions per week.

TRF + Exe:
2421 ± 478 kcal/day
Exe alone:
2513 ± 367 kcal/day

Eucaloric diet

Intermittent
Fasting/Calorie
Restriction
Characteristics

On non-training
days (four days per
week), participants
were instructed to
consume all their
calories within a
flexible four-hour
window between
4:00 p.m. and
midnight, without
restrictions on
calorie amount or
food types.

The 16/8 protocol
required
participants to
consume all meals
within a consistent
8 h daily window.
During the fasting
period, only water
and non-caloric
beverages such as
unsweetened black
coffee or plain tea
were permitted.

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

20 of 43

Table 1. Cont.

Source,
Year

Study Characteristics

Participant Characteristics

Sample
Size (Sex)

Groups

Intervention
Duration
(Weeks)

Outcomes

Health
Status

Age (Years)
Mean ± SD

BMI (kg·m−2)
Mean ± SD

Wang et al.,
2019 [34]

26 M&F

CR + Exe
Exe alone

20

Obesity

CR + Exe:
65–80
Exe alone:
65–80

CR + Exe: 29.7
± 1.8
Exe alone: 29.7
± 2.2

400 m walk
test
Gait Speed
Leg press
strength
Knee
extensor
strength
BMI
BW

Weiss et al.,
2016 [45]

35 M&F

CR + Exe
Exe alone

12

Overweight
partici-
pants

CR + Exe:
57 ± 7
Exe alone:
56 ± 6

CR + Exe:
28.3 ± 1.8
Exe alone:
27 ± 1.5

VO2max
FM
FFM
BFP
BMI
BW

Intermittent
Fasting/Calorie
Restriction
Characteristics

Participants
assigned to the CR +
Exe group followed
a dietary
weight-loss protocol
aimed at achieving
moderate weight
reduction of 5–10%.

All three
interventions aimed
to induce a 20%
energy deficit,
targeting a body
weight reduction of
6–8% over
12 to 14 weeks
(approximately 0.5%
of baseline body
weight lost per
week). The duration
of the intervention
was extended for
individual
participants as
necessary to achieve
the prescribed
weight loss goal.

Non-Fasting/Non-
Calorie Restriction
Control Eating

Exercise
Characteristics

Energy Intake
(kcal/Day)

Hypocaloric
Diet/Eucaloric
Diet

NR

Hypocaloric

Hypocaloric diet

CR + Exe:
2310 ± 159
Exe alone:
1908 ± 125

Participants were
instructed to maintain
their habitual dietary
intake.

Participants were
instructed to maintain
their usual dietary
intake.

One-repetition
maximum (1 RM) was
used to determine
training intensity on
weight-stack
resistance machines.
The protocol aimed for
participants to
perform 3 sets of 10
repetitions at 70% of
their 1 RM, with
approximately 1 min
of rest between sets.
Resistance was
increased once a
participant
successfully
completed 10
repetitions on the third
set in two consecutive
sessions. Training
occurred three times
per week.

The objective of the
Exe intervention was
to increase total energy
expenditure (TEE) by
approximately 20%
without altering
dietary habits.
Recommended
activities included
cardiovascular
exercises such as brisk
walking and cycling,
as well as functional
physical activities like
walking to work or
carrying out yard
work, performed six
days per week.

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

Source,
Year

Sample
Size (Sex)

Groups

Xu et al.,
2022 [46]

48 M&F

Intermittent-
CR + Exe
Continuous-
CR + Exe
Exe alone

Table 1. Cont.

Study Characteristics

Participant Characteristics

Intervention
Duration
(Weeks)

4

Outcomes

Health
Status

Age (Years)
Mean ± SD

BMI (kg·m−2)
Mean ± SD

Overweight

VO2max
BFP
BMI

Intermittent-
CR + Exe:
21.3 ± 2.24
Continuous-
CR + Exe:
21.3 ± 2.24
Exe alone:
21.3 ± 2.24

Intermittent-
CR + Exe:
26.90 ± 1.46
Continuous-CR
+ Exe:
26.39 ± 1.63
Exe alone:
26.12 ± 2.01

Yassine et al.,
2009 [37]

24 M&F

CR + Exe
Exe alone

12

VO2max
FM
FFM
BMI
BW

Older
adults with
obesity

CR + Exe:
65.5 ± 5
Exe alone:
65.5 ± 5

CR + Exe:
33.7 ± 4.7
Exe alone:
35.3 ± 5.8

Intermittent
Fasting/Calorie
Restriction
Characteristics

Participants in the
Intermittent-CR
group consumed
30% of their daily
recommended
energy intake
(approximately
500–1000 kcal) on
two non-consecutive
days per week, while
eating ad libitum on
the remaining
five days.
The Continuous-CR
group followed a
daily hypoenergetic
diet, consuming 70%
of their estimated
energy
requirements—
approximately
1300–1600 kcal for
females and
1600–1900 kcal for
males.

In the CR + Exe
group, participants
were instructed to
decrease their daily
energy intake by
500 kcal.

Non-Fasting/Non-
Calorie Restriction
Control Eating

Exercise
Characteristics

Energy Intake
(kcal/Day)

21 of 43

Hypocaloric
Diet/Eucaloric
Diet

Hypocaloric diet

The daily
recommended
energy intakes were
1800–2250 kcal for
females and
2250–2700 kcal for
males

Participants in the Exe
alone group consumed
their full daily
recommended energy
intake, distributed
across three meals.

NR

Participants completed
exercise sessions five
times per week,
consisting of
high-intensity intervals
at 80% of their VO2max
interspersed with
active recovery periods
at 50% VO2max. Each
session included five 3
min cycling bouts,
totaling 30 min of
exercise, preceded by a
10 min warm-up and
followed by a 10-min
cool-down. The HIIT
protocol was
structured to create an
approximate energy
deficit of 310 kcal per
session, with session
duration individually
adjusted.

Participants engaged
in exercise sessions
lasting 50 to 60 min per
day, five days per
week. The regimen
included treadmill
walking and/or
cycling on an
ergometer, with over
75% of the effort
dedicated to treadmill
activity. During the
initial sessions, exercise
intensity was set at
60% to 65% of HRmax,
increasing to 80% to
85% HRmax (~70%
VO2max) after week 4.

Hypocaloric diet

Participants in the
Exe + CR group
consumed fewer
calories
(1303 ± 210 kcal/day)
than those in the Exe
group

(2141 ± 1338 kcal/day)

Abbreviations: F: Female, M: Male, Exe: Exercise, CR: Calorie restricted, CON: Control, kcal: Kilocalorie, d: day, Min: Minute, g: gram, MJ: Megajoules, h: hour, NR: No report, ND: No
diet, IF: Intermittent fasting, TRF: Time restricted feeding, ADF: Alternate day fasting, RIF: Ramadan intermittent fasting, RM: Rep max, HR: Heart rate, VO2max: Maximal oxygen
consumption, SJ: squat jump, CMJ: Counter movement jump, HIIT: High intensity interval training, SIT: Sprint interval training, GSSG: Small sided games group, GRSA: Repeated sprint
ability group, HRR: Heart rate reserve, BMI: Body mass index, FM: Fat mass, FFM: Fat-free mass, BFP: Body fat percentage.

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

22 of 43

3.3. Intervention Characteristics

A combination of IF and CR methodologies was implemented across the included
studies in the analysis. Six studies used RIF [33,35,48–51], where participants refrained from
eating and drinking from sunrise to sunset. Eleven studies used TRF with a 16 h fasting
period an 8 h feeding window [22,23,31,36,43,47,52,54–56,60]. Two studies followed a 5:2
diet approach, which involved a 6 h eating window and a fasting period of 18 h on fasting
days [40,58]. One study used ADF where participants consumed 25% of their daily recom-
mended energy intake on each fast day [34]. Taken together, IF regimens consisted of either
hypocaloric or eucaloric diet. Remaining studies used CR which reduce their daily energy
intake by 250–1500 kcal of their habitual diet [32,34,37–39,41,42,44–46,53,57,59,61,62]. In all
cases the control group refrained from IF and consumed a control diet combined with exer-
cise. The length of the interventions ranged from 4 weeks [22,31,33,35,36,46,48–52,55,56,61]
to 52 weeks [54,59]. The studies incorporated various forms of exercise training interven-
tions, including high-intensity interval training, aerobic training, resistance training, and
power-sports training (specifically, CMJ test). Detailed information on the intervention
characteristics can be found in Table 1.

3.4. Meta-Analysis
3.4.1. The Effects of IF and CR Combined with Exercise Training on Exercise Performance
VO2max

Based on 26 intervention arms, the combination of IF and CR with exercise did not
significantly alter VO2max [SMD = 0.005 (95% CI −0.127 to 0.137), p = 0.94] compared to
exercise alone (Figure 2). The studies included in the analysis exhibited no heterogeneity
(I2 = 0.00%, p = 0.84). The absence of publication bias was confirmed by the results of the
funnel plots and Egger’s test (p = 0.57). Sensitivity analysis, conducted by removing individ-
ual studies, showed that the significance and direction of the results remained unchanged.

Figure 2. Forest plot of the effects of IF and CR combined with exercise vs. exercise alone on
VO2max. Data are reported as SMD (95% confidence limits). SMD, standardized mean differences; IF,
intermittent fasting; CR, calorie restriction; Exe, exercise [31,32,36–41,45–47,51,53,56,58–63].

Subgroup analyses by type of diet showed no significant change in VO2max for TRF
[SMD = 0.134 (95% CI −0.145 to 0.412), p = 0.34, 8 interventions] and CR [SMD = −0.063

ModelStudy nameStatistics for each studyStd diff in means and 95% CIStd diff Standard Lower Upper in meanserrorVariancelimitlimitZ-Valuep-ValueBatitucci et al. 20220.2710.3990.159-0.5111.0520.6780.498Brady et al. 2021-0.1990.4940.244-1.1670.769-0.4030.687Brisswalter et al. 20120.5920.4820.232-0.3521.5361.2290.219Cho et al. 20190.5000.4790.229-0.4381.4381.0440.296Christiansen et al. 2010-0.4320.3200.103-1.0590.196-1.3480.178Coker et al. 2009 a0.0000.4860.236-0.9520.9520.0001.000Cooke et al. 20220.2640.4280.183-0.5751.1040.6180.537Cooke et al. 2022b0.3000.4290.184-0.5411.1400.6990.484Correia et al. 20240.1200.3650.134-0.5970.8360.3280.743Cox et al. 2004 a0.3120.4030.162-0.4771.1020.7750.438Cox et al. 2004 b-0.4830.3990.159-1.2660.299-1.2110.226Habermann et al. 2015 a0.0000.1830.033-0.3580.3580.0001.000Hagan et al. 1986 a-0.2060.4090.168-1.0080.597-0.5020.615Hagan et al. 1986 b-0.0460.4080.167-0.8470.754-0.1140.910Haganes et al. 20220.1890.2780.077-0.3550.7340.6820.496Hammer et al. 1989 a0.1180.4880.238-0.8391.0750.2410.810Hammer et al. 1989 b0.0860.4880.238-0.8711.0430.1760.860Moro et al. 2020-0.1310.5010.251-1.1120.850-0.2620.793Nicklas et al. 20180.2060.2060.043-0.1980.6100.9990.318Nicklas et al. 2018b0.2780.2100.044-0.1340.6901.3210.186Nieman et al. 2000 a-0.4200.3080.095-1.0240.185-1.3620.173Tovar et al. 2021-0.0470.5180.268-1.0610.968-0.0900.928Weiss et al. 2016-0.4330.3430.118-1.1060.240-1.2610.207Xu et al. 2022a-0.4700.3580.128-1.1730.232-1.3130.189Xu et al. 2022b-0.3170.3560.127-1.0140.380-0.8920.373Yassine et al. 2009-0.1890.4090.167-0.9910.613-0.4620.644Random0.0050.0670.005-0.1270.1370.0750.940-1.50-0.750.000.751.50Favours - Exe onlyFavours - IF and CRNutrients 2025, 17, 1992

23 of 43

(95% CI −0.216 to 0.091), p = 0.42, 16 interventions] compared to exercise alone. One study
used RIF and another used ADF.

Subgroup analyses by intervention duration revealed that combining IF or CR with
exercise did not significantly affect VO2max compared to exercise alone, either in long-term
interventions (>8 weeks) [SMD = −0.023 (95% CI −0.186 to 0.140), p = 0.78, 13 interventions]
or short-term interventions (≤8 weeks) [SMD = 0.057 (95% CI −0.166 to 0.281), p = 0.61,
13 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by diet days/week showed no significant effect on VO2max when
combining IF or CR with exercise compared to exercise alone for either >3 days/week
[SMD = −0.091 (95% CI −0.253 to 0.071), p = 0.27, 19 interventions] or ≤3 days/week
[SMD = 0.191 (95% CI −0.035 to 0.417), p = 0.09, 7 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by training frequency (number of training sessions per week) re-
vealed that combining IF or CR with exercise did not significantly affect VO2max compared to
exercise alone for either >3 sessions/week [SMD = −0.043 (95% CI −0.204 to 0.117), p = 0.59,
15 interventions] or ≤3 sessions/week [SMD = 0.104 (95% CI −0.126 to 0.334), p = 0.34,
11 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by intensity of aerobic training revealed that combining IF or CR
with exercise did not significantly affect VO2max compared to exercise alone for either
moderate-intensity aerobic training [SMD = 0.075 (95% CI −0.111 to 0.261), p = 0.42, nine
interventions] or high-intensity aerobic training [SMD = −0.042 (95% CI −0.384 to 0.299),
p = 0.80, five interventions].

Subgroup analyses by participant characteristics revealed that combining IF or CR
with exercise did not significantly affect VO2max compared to exercise alone in either
untrained [SMD = −0.004 (95% CI −0.143 to 0.135), p = 0.95, 21 interventions] or trained
participants [SMD = 0.082 (95% CI −0.321 to 0.485), p = 0.69, 5 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by gender revealed that combining IF or CR with exercise did not
significantly affect VO2max compared to exercise alone in either females [SMD = 0.004
(95% CI −0.223 to 0.232), p = 0.97, seven interventions] or males [SMD = −0.010
(95% CI −0.312 to 0.293), p = 0.95, eight interventions]. Eleven studies included both male
and female participants.

Handgrip Strength

Based on five intervention arms, IF and CR combined with exercise significantly
increased handgrip strength [WMD = 1.707 kg (95% CI 0.285 to 3.128), p = 0.01] com-
pared to exercise alone (Figure 3). The studies included in the analysis demonstrated no
heterogeneity (I2 = 0.00%, p = 0.89). The absence of publication bias was supported by
the results of funnel plots and Egger’s test (p = 0.19). Sensitivity analysis, performed by
removing individual studies, showed that the significance and direction of the results
remained unchanged.

Figure 3. Forest plot of the effects of IF and CR combined with exercise vs. exercise alone on handgrip
strength. Data are reported as WMD (95% confidence limits). WMD, weighted mean differences; IF,
intermittent fasting; CR, calorie restriction; Exe, exercise [35,43,44,58].

ModelStudy nameStatistics for each studyDifference in means and 95% CIDifference Standard Lower Upper in meanserrorVariancelimitlimitZ-Valuep-ValueBatitucci et al. 20221.0003.89615.180-6.6368.6360.2570.797Bouhlel et al. 2013 a-0.7003.0379.226-6.6535.253-0.2300.818Bouhlel et al. 2013 b2.4002.3305.429-2.1676.9671.0300.303Kotarsky et al. 2021-1.0004.93724.376-10.6778.677-0.2030.839Nicklas et al. 20151.9000.8160.6660.3013.4992.3290.020Random1.7070.7250.5260.2853.1282.3530.019-11.00-5.500.005.5011.00Favours - Exe onlyFavours - IF and CRNutrients 2025, 17, 1992

24 of 43

Due to the small number of studies, subgroup analyses based on type of diet, inter-
vention duration, diet days/week, type of exercise, training frequency, and gender were
not conducted.

Bench Press Strength

Based on 9 intervention arms, IF and CR combined with exercise did not significantly
alter bench press strength [WMD = 0.377 kg (95% CI −2.247 to 3.002), p = 0.778] compared
to exercise alone (Figure 4). The studies included in the analysis showed no heterogeneity
(I2 = 0.00%, p = 0.85). The absence of publication bias was supported by the results of
funnel plots and Egger’s test (p = 0.44). Sensitivity analysis, conducted by removing
individual studies, demonstrated that the significance and direction of the results remained
unchanged.

Figure 4. Forest plot of the effects of IF and CR combined with exercise vs. exercise alone on bench
press strength. Data are reported as WMD (95% confidence limits). WMD, weighted mean differences;
IF, intermittent fasting; CR, calorie restriction; Exe, exercise [22,23,54,55,57,58,63].

Subgroup analyses by participant characteristics revealed that combining IF or CR with
exercise did not significantly affect bench press strength compared to exercise alone in either
untrained [WMD = −1.209 kg (95% CI −4.477 to 2.059), p = 0.46, three interventions] or
trained participants [WMD = 3.259 kg (95% CI −1.146 to 7.664), p = 0.14, six interventions].
Due to the limited number of studies, subgroup analyses based on type of diet,
intervention duration, diet frequency (days/week), type of exercise, training frequency,
and gender were not conducted.

Knee Extensor Strength

Based on 4 intervention arms, combining IF and CR with exercise did not significantly
alter knee extensor strength [WMD = −4.729 kg (95% CI −10.781 to 1.324), p = 0.12]
compared to exercise alone (Figure 5). The studies included in the analysis demonstrated
no heterogeneity (I2 = 0.00%, p = 0.69). The absence of publication bias was supported by
the results of funnel plots and the Egger’s test (p = 0.40). Sensitivity analysis performed
by removing individual studies showed that the significance and direction of the results
remained unchanged.

Figure 5. Forest plot of the effects of IF and CR combined with exercise vs. exercise alone on knee
extensor strength. Data are reported as WMD (95% confidence limits). WMD, weighted mean
differences; IF, intermittent fasting; CR, calorie restriction; Exe, exercise [34,42–44].

ModelStudy nameStatistics for each studyDifference in means and 95% CIDifference Standard Lower Upper in meanserrorVariancelimitlimitZ-Valuep-ValueBallor et al. 19880.5402.8087.887-4.9646.0440.1920.848Batitucci et al. 2022-2.0003.0459.271-7.9683.968-0.6570.511Cho et al. 2019-2.3002.8288.000-7.8443.244-0.8130.416Moro et al. 20162.5305.54430.733-8.33613.3960.4560.648Moro et al. 20211.7304.12617.021-6.3569.8160.4190.675Moro et al. 2021b5.7903.65913.387-1.38112.9611.5820.114Stratton et al. 2020-0.6508.60073.967-17.50716.207-0.0760.940Tinseley et al. 20161.00010.578111.895-19.73321.7330.0950.925Tinseley et al. 2016b3.00010.238104.808-17.06523.0650.2930.769Random0.3771.3391.793-2.2473.0020.2820.778-24.00-12.000.0012.0024.00Favours - Exe onlyFavours - IF and CRModelStudy nameStatistics for each studyDifference in means and 95% CIDifference Standard Lower Upper in meanserrorVariancelimitlimitZ-Valuep-ValueJefferson et al. 2025-2.70013.750189.072-29.65024.250-0.1960.844Kotarsky et al. 2021-24.00016.253264.159-55.8557.855-1.4770.140Nicklas et al. 2015-4.1003.63113.182-11.2163.016-1.1290.259Wang et al. 2018-4.0007.08350.170-17.8839.883-0.5650.572Random-4.7293.0889.536-10.7811.324-1.5310.126-56.00-28.000.0028.0056.00Favours - IF and CRFavours - Exe onlyNutrients 2025, 17, 1992

25 of 43

Due to the small number of studies, subgroup analyses based on type of diet, interven-
tion duration, diet frequency (days/week), type of exercise, training frequency, and gender
were not conducted.

Leg Press Strength

Based on seven intervention arms, combining IF and CR with exercise did not signif-
icantly affect leg press strength [WMD = −2.874 kg (95% CI −9.784 to 4.036), p = 0.415]
compared to exercise alone (Figure 6). The studies included in the analysis demonstrated
no heterogeneity (I2 = 0.00%, p = 0.99). The absence of publication bias was supported by
the results of funnel plots and the Egger’s test (p = 0.63). Sensitivity analysis, performed
by removing individual studies, showed that the significance and direction of the results
remained unchanged.

Figure 6. Forest plot of the effects of IF and CR combined with exercise vs. exercise alone on leg press
strength. Data are reported as WMD (95% confidence limits). WMD, weighted mean differences; IF,
intermittent fasting; CR, calorie restriction; Exe, exercise [23,34,54,55,58,63].

Subgroup analyses by participant characteristics revealed that combining IF or CR
with exercise did not significantly affect leg press strength compared to exercise alone
in either untrained [WMD = −6.777 kg (95% CI −21.083 to 7.529), p = 0.35, three inter-
ventions] or trained participants [WMD = −1.686 kg (95% CI −9.578 to 6.205), p = 0.67,
four interventions].

Due to the small number of studies, subgroup analyses based on type of diet, inter-
vention duration, days of diet per week, type of exercise, training frequency, and gender
were not conducted.

CMJ

Based on seven intervention arms, IF and CR combined with exercise did not sig-
nificantly alter CMJ [WMD = −0.226 cm (95% CI −2.037 to 1.584), p = 0.80] compared
to exercise alone (Figure 7). The studies included in the analysis demonstrated no het-
erogeneity (I2 = 0.00%, p = 0.95). The absence of publication bias was confirmed by the
results of funnel plots and the Egger’s test (p = 0.45). Sensitivity analysis, conducted by
removing individual studies, showed that the significance and direction of the results
remained unchanged.

Figure 7. Forest plot of the effects of IF and CR combined with exercise vs. exercise alone on CMJ. Data
are reported as WMD (95% confidence limits). WMD, weighted mean differences; IF, intermittent
fasting; CR, calorie restriction; Exe, exercise [33,35,50,52,55].

ModelStudy nameStatistics for each studyDifference in means and 95% CIDifference Standard Lower Upper in meanserrorVariancelimitlimitZ-Valuep-ValueBatitucci et al. 2022-11.00023.340544.739-56.74534.745-0.4710.637Cho et al. 2019-7.2008.34469.620-23.5549.154-0.8630.388Moro et al. 2016-3.24016.237263.649-35.06428.584-0.2000.842Moro et al. 2021-2.7206.09937.198-14.6749.234-0.4460.656Moro et al. 2021b-0.7405.79733.609-12.10310.623-0.1280.898Stratton et al. 20202.71028.225796.629-52.60958.0290.0960.924Wang et al. 2018-1.40019.722388.938-40.05337.253-0.0710.943Random-2.8743.52612.429-9.7844.036-0.8150.415-60.00-30.000.0030.0060.00Favours - IF and CRFavours - Exe onlyModelStudy nameStatistics for each studyDifference in means and 95% CIDifference Standard Lower Upper in meanserrorVariancelimitlimitZ-Valuep-ValueBouhlel et al. 2013-2.0002.9668.800-7.8143.814-0.6740.500Brini et al. 2020a2.2503.21110.310-4.0438.5430.7010.483Brini et al. 2020b1.2602.6376.954-3.9096.4290.4780.633Correia et al. 2023-1.4002.0254.102-5.3702.570-0.6910.489Kendall et al. 2008a-0.2001.7723.139-3.6723.272-0.1130.910Kendall et al. 2008b-0.2002.4856.174-5.0704.670-0.0800.936Stratton et al. 2020-0.0003.27010.695-6.4106.410-0.0001.000Random-0.2260.9240.853-2.0371.584-0.2450.806-9.00-4.500.004.509.00Favours - IF and CRFavours - Exe onlyNutrients 2025, 17, 1992

26 of 43

Due to the small number of studies, subgroup analyses based on type of diet, inter-
vention duration, days of diet per week, type of exercise, training frequency, and gender
were not conducted.

The 400 m Walk Test

Based on four intervention arms, IF and CR combined with exercise did not signifi-
cantly change the 400 m walk test [WMD = −8.794 s (95% CI −17.981 to 0.393), p = 0.06]
compared to exercise alone (Figure 8). The studies included in the analysis demonstrated
no heterogeneity (I2 = 0.00%, p = 0.84). The absence of publication bias was confirmed by
the results of funnel plots and the Egger’s test (p = 0.06). Sensitivity analysis, conducted
by removing individual studies, showed that the significance and direction of the results
remained unchanged.

Figure 8. Forest plot of the effects of CR combined with exercise vs. exercise alone on the 400 m walk
test. Data are reported as WMD (95% confidence limits). WMD, weighted mean differences; CR,
calorie restriction; Exe, exercise [32,34,44].

Due to the small number of studies, subgroup analyses based on type of diet, inter-
vention duration, days of diet per week, type of exercise, training frequency, and gender
were not performed.

Gait Speed

Based on four intervention arms, CR combined with exercise did not significantly
change gait speed [WMD = 0.005 m/s (95% CI −0.035 to 0.044), p = 0.82] compared to exer-
cise alone (Figure 9). The studies included in the analysis demonstrated no heterogeneity
(I2 = 0.00%, p = 0.99). The absence of publication bias was supported by the results of funnel
plots and the Egger’s test (p = 0.88). Sensitivity analysis, performed by removing individual
studies, showed that the significance and direction of the results remained unchanged.

Figure 9. Forest plot of the effects of CR combined with exercise vs. exercise alone on Gait speed.
Data are reported as WMD (95% confidence limits). WMD, weighted mean differences; CR, calorie
restriction; Exe, exercise [32,34,44].

Due to the small number of studies, subgroup analyses based on type of diet, inter-
vention duration, days of diet per week, type of exercise, training frequency, and gender
were not performed.

ModelStudy nameStatistics for each studyDifference in means and 95% CIDifference Standard Lower Upper in meanserrorVariancelimitlimitZ-Valuep-ValueNicklas et al. 2015a-13.0006.89847.585-26.5200.520-1.8850.059Nicklas et al. 2018b-4.00011.047122.037-25.65217.652-0.3620.717Nicklas et al. 2018c-3.00011.248126.523-25.04619.046-0.2670.790Wang et al. 2018-8.40010.909119.006-29.78112.981-0.7700.441Random-8.7944.68721.970-17.9810.393-1.8760.061-30.00-15.000.0015.0030.00Favours - CRFavours - Exe onlyModelStudy nameStatistics for each studyDifference in means and 95% CIDifference Standard Lower Upper in meanserrorVariancelimitlimitZ-Valuep-ValueNicklas et al. 2015a0.0100.0340.001-0.0570.0770.2940.769Nicklas et al. 2018b0.0000.0390.001-0.0760.0760.0001.000Nicklas et al. 2018c0.0000.0390.002-0.0760.0760.0001.000Wang et al. 20180.0100.0650.004-0.1170.1370.1540.878Fixed0.0050.0200.000-0.0350.0440.2230.823-0.25-0.130.000.130.25Favours - Exe onlyFavours - CRNutrients 2025, 17, 1992

27 of 43

3.4.2. The Effects of IF and CR Combined with Exercise Training on Body Weight and
Body Composition
Body Weight

Based on 40 intervention arms, IF and CR combined with exercise significantly de-
creased body weight [WMD = −4.375 kg (95% CI −5.454 to −3.296), p = 0.001] compared
to exercise alone (Figure 10). The studies included in the analysis demonstrated moderate
heterogeneity (I2 = 41.98%, p = 0.003). The absence of publication bias was supported by
the results of funnel plots and the Egger’s test (p = 0.34). Sensitivity analysis performed by
removing individual studies showed that the significance and direction of the results did
not change.

Figure 10. Forest plot of the effects of CR combined with exercise vs. exercise alone on body weight.
Data are reported as WMD (95% confidence limits). WMD, weighted mean differences; CR, calorie
restriction; Exe, exercise [22,31,32,34–45,47,49–63].

Subgroup analyses by type of diet revealed significant reductions in body weight for
TRF [WMD = −2.810 kg (95% CI −4.368 to −1.252), p = 0.001, 14 interventions] and CR
[WMD = −6.425 kg (95% CI −8.459 to −4.792), p = 0.001, 20 interventions], but not for
RIF [WMD = −1.247 kg (95% CI −3.735 to 1.241), p = 0.32, 5 interventions] compared to
exercise alone. One study used an ADF diet.

Subgroup analyses by intervention duration revealed that combining IF or CR with
exercise led to significant reductions in body weight compared to exercise alone, both in
long-term interventions > 8 weeks [WMD = −6.738 kg (95% CI −8.583 to −4.893), p = 0.001,
18 interventions] and short-term interventions ≤8 weeks [WMD = −2.053 kg (95% CI
−3.100 to −1.006), p = 0.001, 22 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by days of diet/week revealed that combining IF or CR with
exercise led to significant reductions in body weight compared to exercise alone, both
for >3 days/week [WMD = −4.432 kg (95% CI −5.709 to −3.156), p = 0.001, 35 inter-

ModelStudy nameStatistics for each studyDifference in means and 95% CIDifference Standard Lower Upper in meanserrorVariancelimitlimitZ-Valuep-ValueBallor et al. 1988-4.3403.88715.107-11.9583.278-1.1170.264Batitucci et al. 2022-2.7002.8798.287-8.3422.942-0.9380.348Bouhlel et al. 2013-2.4003.91615.332-10.0745.274-0.6130.540Brady et al. 2021-1.8803.1509.923-8.0544.294-0.5970.551Brini et al. 2020-2.0004.93524.354-11.6727.672-0.4050.685Brini et al. 2020b-2.0006.37740.666-14.49910.499-0.3140.754Brini et al. 2021-3.1602.7627.629-8.5732.253-1.1440.253Brisswalter et al. 2012-0.2001.6702.789-3.4733.073-0.1200.905Cho et al. 2019-1.9000.8490.720-3.563-0.237-2.2390.025Christiansen et al. 2010-8.8001.3021.695-11.351-6.249-6.7600.000Coker et al. 2009 a-5.0006.01836.219-16.7966.796-0.8310.406Cooke et al. 2022-4.8301.5542.415-7.876-1.784-3.1080.002Correia et al. 2023-0.5002.3505.524-5.1074.107-0.2130.832Correia et al. 2024-1.0004.03716.295-8.9126.912-0.2480.804Cox et al. 2004-10.1101.8303.349-13.697-6.523-5.5250.000Cox et al. 2004 b-10.4405.46329.849-21.1480.268-1.9110.056Habermann et al. 2015-9.1002.0154.058-13.048-5.152-4.5170.000Hagan et al. 1986 a-11.0003.92015.367-18.683-3.317-2.8060.005Hagan et al. 1986 b-6.9002.6216.872-12.038-1.762-2.6320.008Haganes et al. 2022-2.4003.29710.869-8.8624.062-0.7280.467Hammer et al. 1989 a-2.7009.24685.491-20.82215.422-0.2920.770Hammer et al. 1989 b-1.3009.40688.479-19.73617.136-0.1380.890Hammer et al. 1989 c-2.3009.31886.832-20.56415.964-0.2470.805Hammer et al. 1989 d-3.6009.26085.755-21.75014.550-0.3890.697Jefferson et al. 2025-6.4004.49720.219-15.2132.413-1.4230.155Kotarsky et al. 2021-3.0004.24918.055-11.3285.328-0.7060.480Moro et al. 2020-1.4903.0009.003-7.3714.391-0.4970.619Moro et al. 2021-0.6902.5896.700-5.7634.383-0.2670.790Moro et al. 2021b-5.6302.3815.669-10.297-0.963-2.3650.018Nicklas et al. 2015-3.0000.4360.190-3.855-2.145-6.8760.000Nicklas et al. 2018-6.4702.6837.201-11.730-1.210-2.4110.016Nicklas et al. 2018b-7.4702.9028.424-13.159-1.781-2.5740.010Nieman et l. 2000 a-7.1003.71513.804-14.3820.182-1.9110.056Stratton et al. 20200.2005.08525.858-9.76710.1670.0390.969Tinseley et al. 2016a-1.1007.81761.101-16.42014.220-0.1410.888Tinseley et al. 2016b-4.0007.63758.325-18.96810.968-0.5240.600Tovar et al. 2021-1.1004.52120.438-9.9617.761-0.2430.808Wang et al. 2018-5.7001.2291.509-8.108-3.292-4.6400.000Weiss et al. 2016-0.7005.08525.859-10.6679.267-0.1380.891Yassine et al. 2009-3.1006.28339.473-15.4149.214-0.4930.622Random-4.3750.5500.303-5.454-3.296-7.9480.000-22.00-11.000.0011.0022.00Favours - IF and CRFavours - Exe onlyNutrients 2025, 17, 1992

28 of 43

ventions] and ≤3 days/week [WMD = −3.974 kg (95% CI −6.185 to −1.764), p = 0.001,
5 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by type of exercise revealed that combining IF or CR with exercise
led to significant reductions in body weight compared to exercise alone, both for aero-
bic training [WMD = −5.117 kg (95% CI −6.587 to −3.646), p = 0.001, 28 interventions],
resistance training [WMD = −3.238 kg (95% CI −4.001 to −2.476), p = 0.001, 10 interven-
tions], and combined training [WMD = −1.942 kg (95% CI −3.573 to −0.311), p = 0.001,
2 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by training frequency revealed that combining IF or CR with
exercise led to significant reductions in body weight compared to exercise alone, both for
high-frequency training > 3 sessions/week [WMD = −5.515 kg (95% CI −7.213 to −3.817),
p = 0.001, 18 interventions] and low-frequency training ≤ 3 sessions/week [WMD = −3.899
kg (95% CI −5.292 to −2.506), p = 0.001, 20 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by participant characteristics revealed that combining IF or CR
with exercise led to significant reductions in body weight compared to exercise alone,
both in trained [WMD = −1.649 kg (95% CI −3.238 to −0.060), p = 0.04, 15 interventions]
and untrained participants [WMD = −5.609 kg (95% CI −7.027 to −4.192), p = 0.001,
25 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by gender revealed that combining IF or CR with exercise led
to significant reductions in body weight compared to exercise alone, both in female
[WMD = −5.966 kg (95% CI −8.172 to −3.760), p = 0.001, 10 interventions] and male
participants [WMD = −3.333 kg (95% CI −5.325 to −1.340), p = 0.001, 18 interventions].
Thirteen studies included both male and female participants.

BMI

Based on 17 intervention arms, IF and CR combined with exercise decreased BMI
[WMD = −1.194 kg·m−2 (95% CI −1.893 to −0.494), p = 0.001] significantly compared
to exercise alone (Figure 11). The studies included in the analysis demonstrated high
heterogeneity (I2 = 86.66%, p = 0.001). The absence of publication bias was supported by
the results of funnel plots and the Egger’s test (p = 0.16). Sensitivity analysis performed by
removing individual studies showed that the significance and direction of the results did
not change.

Figure 11. Forest plot of the effects of CR combined with exercise vs. exercise alone on BMI. Data are
reported as WMD (95% confidence limits). WMD, weighted mean differences; CR, calorie restriction;
Exe, exercise [34,35,37–39,42,43,45,46,49,50,53,58,63].

ModelStudy nameStatistics for each studyDifference in means and 95% CIDifference Standard Lower Upper in meanserrorVariancelimitlimitZ-Valuep-ValueBatitucci et al. 2022-0.9000.9680.938-2.7980.998-0.9290.353Bouhlel et al. 2013-0.8000.9090.827-2.5820.982-0.8800.379Brini et al. 2020-0.5601.1891.415-2.8911.771-0.4710.638Brini et al. 2020b-0.5700.8470.717-2.2301.090-0.6730.501Brini et al. 2021-0.0800.5460.298-1.1510.991-0.1460.884Cho et al. 2019-0.7000.4240.180-1.5320.132-1.6500.099Christiansen et al. 2010-2.9000.3860.149-3.656-2.144-7.5140.000Coker et al. 2009-2.0001.4182.010-4.7780.778-1.4110.158Cox et al. 2004-2.8000.5830.339-3.942-1.658-4.8060.000Cox et al. 2004 b-3.2000.4410.194-4.064-2.336-7.2590.000Jefferson et al. 2025-2.3001.0431.089-4.345-0.255-2.2040.028Kotarsky et al. 2021-0.9001.1651.357-3.1831.383-0.7730.440Wang et al. 2018-1.9000.4470.200-2.777-1.023-4.2490.000Weiss et al. 2016-0.2000.4380.191-1.0580.658-0.4570.648Yassine et al. 2009-1.1002.1224.501-5.2583.058-0.5180.604Xu et al. 2022a0.4400.2390.057-0.0290.9091.8380.066Xu et al. 2022b-0.0800.2340.055-0.5380.378-0.3420.732Random-1.1940.3570.128-1.893-0.494-3.3420.001-6.00-3.000.003.006.00Favours - IF & CRFavours - Exe onlyNutrients 2025, 17, 1992

29 of 43

Subgroup analyses by type of diet revealed significant reductions in BMI for CR
[WMD = −1.569 kg·m−2 (95% CI −2.591 to −0.547), p = 0.003, 10 interventions], but not
for TRF [WMD = −0.900 kg·m−2 (95% CI −2.359 to 0.559), p = 0.22, 2 interventions], nor
RIF [WMD = −0.364 kg·m−2 (95% CI −1.124 to 0.395), p = 0.34, 4 interventions] compared
to exercise alone. One study used an ADF diet.

Subgroup analyses by intervention duration revealed that combining IF or CR with
exercise led to significant reductions in BMI compared to exercise alone, both in long-term
interventions > 8 weeks [WMD = −1.569 kg·m−2 (95% CI −2.591 to −0.547), p = 0.003,
10 interventions] and short-term interventions ≤ 8 weeks [WMD = −0.566 kg·m−2 (95% CI
−1.090 to −0.043), p = 0.03, 7 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by days of diet/week revealed that combining IF or CR with
exercise led to significant reductions in BMI compared to exercise alone, for >3 days/week
[WMD = −1.571 kg·m−2 (95% CI −2.333 to −0.810), p = 0.001, 13 interventions], but not for
≤3 days/week [WMD = −0.090 kg·m−2 (95% CI −0.623 to 0.443), p = 0.74, 4 interventions].
Subgroup analyses by type of exercise revealed that combining IF or CR with ex-
ercise led to significant reductions in BMI compared to exercise alone, both for aer-
obic training [WMD = −1.123 kg·m−2 (95% CI −1.982 to −0.264), p = 0.01, 13 inter-
ventions] and resistance training [WMD = −1.962 kg·m−2 (95% CI −2.768 to −1.156),
p = 0.001, 2 interventions], but not for combined training [WMD = −0.723 kg·m−2
(95% CI −1.505 to 0.058), p = 0.07, 2 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by training frequency revealed that combining IF or CR with
exercise led to significant reductions in BMI compared to exercise alone, for low-frequency
≤3 sessions/week [WMD = −1.603 kg·m−2 (95% CI −2.449 to −0.757), p = 0.001, eight
interventions], but not for high-frequency > 3 sessions/week [WMD = 0.062 kg·m−2
(95% CI −0.232 to 0.356), p = 0.67, seven interventions].

Subgroup analyses by participant characteristics revealed that combining IF or CR
with exercise led to significant reductions in BMI compared to exercise alone in untrained
[WMD = −1.400 kg·m−2 (95% CI −2.239 to −0.561), p = 0.001, 13 interventions], but
not in trained participants [WMD = −0.364 kg·m−2 (95% CI −1.124 to 0.395), p = 0.34,
4 interventions].

Due to the small number of studies, subgroup analyses based on gender were

not performed.

FFM

Based on 27 intervention arms, IF and CR combined with exercise decreased FFM
[WMD = −1.653 kg (95% CI −2.059 to −1.247), p = 0.001] significantly compared to exercise
alone (Figure 12). The studies included in the analysis demonstrated no heterogeneity
(I2 = 0.00%, p = 0.95). The absence of publication bias was supported by the results of
funnel plots and the Egger’s test (p = 0.51). Sensitivity analysis performed by removing
individual studies showed that the significance and direction of the results did not change.
Subgroup analyses by type of diet revealed significant reductions in FFM for TRF
[WMD = −1.537 kg (95% CI −2.380 to −0.695), p = 0.001, 12 interventions] and CR
[WMD = −1.688 kg (95% CI −2.151 to −1.225), p = 0.001, 15 interventions] compared to
exercise alone. One study used an ADF diet.

Subgroup analyses by intervention duration revealed that combining IF or CR with
exercise led to significant reductions in FFM compared to exercise alone, both for long-
term interventions > 8 weeks [WMD = −1.736 kg (95% CI −2.199 to −1.274), p = 0.001,
13 interventions] and short-term interventions ≤ 8 weeks [WMD = −1.376 kg (95% CI
−2.219 to −0.533), p = 0.001, 14 interventions].

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

30 of 43

Figure 12. Forest plot of the effects of CR combined with exercise vs. exercise alone on fat-free mass.
Data are reported as WMD (95% confidence limits). WMD, weighted mean differences; CR, calorie
restriction; Exe, exercise [22,23,31,32,36,37,40–45,47,52–54,56,57,61].

Subgroup analyses by days of diet/week revealed that combining IF or CR with
exercise led to significant reductions in FFM compared to exercise alone, both for
>3 days/week [WMD = −1.561 kg (95% CI −2.00 to −1.123), p = 0.001, 24 interventions] and
≤3 days/week [WMD = −2.201 kg (95% CI −3.271 to −1.131), p = 0.001, 3 interventions].
Subgroup analyses by type of exercise revealed that combining IF or CR with ex-
ercise led to significant reductions in FFM compared to exercise alone, both for aerobic
training [WMD = −2.249 kg (95% CI −2.915 to −1.584), p = 0.001, 17 interventions] and
resistance training [WMD = −1.303 kg (95% CI −1.817 to −0.789), p = 0.001, 9 interventions].
One study had a combined training protocol.

Subgroup analyses by training frequency revealed that combining IF or CR with ex-
ercise led to significant reductions in FFM compared to exercise alone, for low-frequency
≤ 3 sessions/week [WMD = −1.492 kg (95% CI −1.945 to −1.040), p = 0.001, 13 interven-
tions], but not for high-frequency > 3 sessions/week [WMD = −1.181 kg (95% CI −2.518 to
0.155), p = 0.08, 13 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by participant characteristics revealed that combining IF or CR
with exercise led to significant reductions in FFM compared to exercise alone, for untrained
[WMD = −1.761 kg (95% CI −2.189 to −1.333), p = 0.001, 17 interventions], but not for
trained participants [WMD = −0.701 kg (95% CI −1.974 to 0.571), p = 0.28, 10 interventions].
Subgroup analyses by gender revealed that combining IF or CR with exercise led to sig-
nificant reductions in FFM compared to exercise alone, for males [WMD = −1.916 kg (95% CI
−2.693 to −1.139), p = 0.001, 13 interventions], but not for females [WMD = −1.327 kg
(95% CI −3.638 to 0.985), p = 0.26, 6 interventions]. Eight studies had both male and
female participants.

 ModelStudy nameStatistics for each studyDifference in means and 95% CIDifference Standard Lower Upper in meanserrorVariancelimitlimitZ-Valuep-ValueBallor et al. 1988-0.6402.2024.850-4.9563.676-0.2910.771Brady et al. 2021-1.2202.1304.536-5.3942.954-0.5730.567Cooke et al. 2022-2.2400.5850.343-3.387-1.093-3.8260.000Correia et al. 2023-0.2001.5432.381-3.2242.824-0.1300.897Correia et al. 2024-0.4002.4395.948-5.1804.380-0.1640.870Cox et al. 2004-1.4700.8220.676-3.0810.141-1.7880.074Cox et al. 2004 b-3.3000.6390.409-4.553-2.047-5.1620.000Hagan et al. 1986 a-3.4002.6937.253-8.6791.879-1.2620.207Hagan et al. 1986 b-2.2002.0614.247-6.2391.839-1.0680.286Hammer et al. 1989 a-0.5003.78014.285-7.9086.908-0.1320.895Hammer et al. 1989 b-0.9003.82214.610-8.3926.592-0.2350.814Hammer et al. 1989 c-1.0003.76914.206-8.3876.387-0.2650.791Hammer et al. 1989 d-2.0003.83014.669-9.5075.507-0.5220.602Jefferson et al. 2025-1.0003.81914.586-8.4856.485-0.2620.793Kotarsky et al. 2021-1.0002.8318.015-6.5494.549-0.3530.724Moro et al. 20160.1601.3461.813-2.4792.7990.1190.905Moro et al. 20200.0002.9068.444-5.6955.6950.0001.000Moro et al. 2021-0.0801.6172.614-3.2493.089-0.0490.961Moro et al. 2021b-3.2401.6782.817-6.5290.049-1.9310.054Nicklas et al. 2015-1.4000.2830.080-1.955-0.845-4.9440.000Nicklas et al. 2018-1.8002.0684.278-5.8542.254-0.8700.384Nicklas et al. 2018b-2.1002.2224.938-6.4552.255-0.9450.345Tinseley et al. 2016a0.1004.89723.979-9.4989.6980.0200.984Tinseley et al. 2016b-2.5004.69822.075-11.7096.709-0.5320.595Tovar et al. 2021-0.6003.81714.570-8.0816.881-0.1570.875Weiss et al. 2016-0.7002.8628.190-6.3094.909-0.2450.807Yassine et al. 2009-2.7004.41619.498-11.3555.955-0.6110.541Random-1.6530.2070.043-2.059-1.247-7.9870.000-12.00-6.000.006.0012.00Favours - IF & CRFavours - Exe onlyNutrients 2025, 17, 1992

31 of 43

FM

Based on 25 intervention arms, IF and CR combined with exercise decreased
FM [WMD = −2.858 kg (95% CI −3.650 to −2.067), p = 0.001] compared to exercise
alone (Figure 13). The studies included in the analysis demonstrated no heterogeneity
(I2 = 50.44%, p = 0.002). The absence of publication bias was supported by the results of
funnel plots and the Egger’s test (p = 0.72). Sensitivity analysis performed by removing
individual studies showed that the significance and direction of the results did not change.

Figure 13. Forest plot of the effects of CR combined with exercise vs. exercise alone on fat mass.
Data are reported as WMD (95% confidence limits). WMD, weighted mean differences; CR, calorie
restriction; Exe, exercise [22,23,31,32,37,40–45,47,52–57,60,63].

Subgroup analyses by type of diet revealed significant reductions in FM for TRF
[WMD = −2.540 kg (95% CI −3.109 to −1.971), p = 0.001, 13 interventions] and CR
[WMD = −4.716 kg (95% CI −6.203 to −3.229), p = 0.001, 11 interventions] compared to
exercise alone. One study used an ADF diet.

Subgroup analyses by intervention duration revealed that combining IF or CR with ex-
ercise led to significant reductions in FM compared to exercise alone, for long-term interven-
tions > 8 weeks [WMD = −4.460 kg (95% CI −5.912 to −3.009), p = 0.001, 11 interventions]
and short-term interventions ≤ 8 weeks [WMD = −2.095 kg (95% CI −2.784 to −1.406),
p = 0.001, 14 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by days of diet/week revealed that combining IF or CR with
exercise led to significant reductions in FM compared to exercise alone, for >3 days/week
[WMD = −2.708 kg (95% CI −3.803 to −1.614), p = 0.001, 21 interventions] and ≤3 days/week
[WMD = −3.069 kg (95% CI −4.372 to −1.765), p = 0.001, 4 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by type of exercise revealed that combining IF or CR with exer-
cise led to significant reductions in FM compared to exercise alone, for aerobic training
[WMD = −3.791 kg (95% CI −5.161 to −2.420), p = 0.001, 13 interventions], resistance
training [WMD = −2.487 kg (95% CI −3.192 to −1.781), p = 0.001, 10 interventions] and
combined training [WMD = −1.529 kg (95% CI −2.874 to −0.185), p = 0.02, 2 interventions].

ModelStudy nameStatistics for each studyDifference in means and 95% CIDifference Standard Lower Upper in meanserrorVariancelimitlimitZ-Valuep-ValueBallor et al. 1988-3.7003.19810.226-9.9682.568-1.1570.247Brady et al. 2021-0.6101.6282.651-3.8012.581-0.3750.708Cho et al. 2019-1.5000.7070.500-2.886-0.114-2.1210.034Cooke et al. 2022-3.1100.2910.085-3.681-2.539-10.6820.000Correia et al. 2023-0.4001.4772.182-3.2952.495-0.2710.787Correia et al. 2024-0.7002.0474.189-4.7113.311-0.3420.732Cox et al. 2004-8.5001.9353.746-12.294-4.706-4.3920.000Cox et al. 2004 b-6.9301.1911.419-9.265-4.595-5.8180.000Hagan et al. 1986 a-7.7002.3125.343-12.231-3.169-3.3310.001Hagan et al. 1986 b-4.7001.5952.543-7.826-1.574-2.9470.003Haganes et al. 2022-1.7002.7367.487-7.0633.663-0.6210.534Jefferson et al. 2025-4.7002.3615.574-9.327-0.073-1.9910.047Kotarsky et al. 2021-2.0002.8318.015-7.5493.549-0.7060.480Moro et al. 2016-1.3101.3071.708-3.8711.251-1.0020.316Moro et al. 2021-0.6101.5382.365-3.6242.404-0.3970.692Moro et al. 2021b-1.7601.5212.312-4.7401.220-1.1570.247Nicklas et al. 2015-3.0000.4360.190-3.855-2.145-6.8760.000Nicklas et al. 2018-4.4001.4972.240-7.334-1.466-2.9400.003Nicklas et al. 2018b-5.3001.6152.609-8.466-2.134-3.2810.001Stratton et al. 2020-0.1003.30610.932-6.5806.380-0.0300.976Tinseley et al. 2016a-1.1003.24710.542-7.4645.264-0.3390.735Tinseley et al. 2016b-1.4003.1559.957-7.5854.785-0.4440.657Tovar et al. 2021-0.9002.3055.313-5.4183.618-0.3900.696Weiss et al. 2016-0.2001.8773.523-3.8793.479-0.1070.915Yassine et al. 2009-1.5004.23617.942-9.8026.802-0.3540.723Random-2.8580.4040.163-3.650-2.067-7.0780.000-13.00-6.500.006.5013.00Favours - IF & CRFavours - Exe onlyNutrients 2025, 17, 1992

32 of 43

Subgroup analyses by training frequency revealed that combining IF or CR with
exercise led to significant reductions in FM compared to exercise alone, for high-frequency
> 3 sessions/week [WMD = −3.101 kg (95% CI −4.739 to −1.463), p = 0.001, 9 interventions]
and low-frequency ≤ 3 sessions/week [WMD = −2.446 kg (95% CI −3.249 to −1.644),
p = 0.001, 15 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by participant characteristics revealed that combining IF or CR
with exercise led to significant reductions in FM compared to exercise alone, for untrained
[WMD = −3.804 kg (95% CI −4.778 to −2.830), p = 0.001, 15 interventions], but not for
trained participants [WMD = −0.933 kg (95% CI −2.067 to 0.200), p = 0.10, 10 interventions].
Subgroup analyses by gender revealed that combining IF or CR with exercise led to
significant reductions in FM compared to exercise alone, for females [WMD = −3.902 kg
(95% CI −6.382 to −1.422), p = 0.002, 3 interventions] and males [WMD = −2.583 kg
(95% CI −4.349 to −0.817), p = 0.004, 13 interventions]. Nine studies had both male and
female participants.

BFP

Based on 23 intervention arms, IF and CR combined with exercise decreased
BFP [WMD = −0.826% (95% CI −1.316 to −0.336), p = 0.001] compared to exercise
alone (Figure 14). The studies included in the analysis demonstrated no heterogeneity
(I2 = 14.14%, p = 0.26). The absence of publication bias was supported by the results of
funnel plots and the Egger’s test (p = 0.82). Sensitivity analysis performed by removing
individual studies showed that the significance and direction of the results did not change.

Figure 14. Forest plot of the effects of CR combined with exercise vs. exercise alone on body fat
percentage. Data are reported as WMD (95% confidence limits). WMD, weighted mean differences;
CR, calorie restriction; Exe, exercise [22,32,39,42,44–46,49,50,55–58,61–63].

Subgroup analyses by type of diet revealed no significant changes in BFP for TRF
[WMD = −0.746% (95% CI −2.563 to 1.072), p = 0.42, 5 interventions], CR [WMD = −0.930%
(95% CI −1.864 to 0.001), p = 0.05, 14 interventions], and RIF [WMD = −0.782 (95% CI
−1.663 to 0.099), p = 0.08, 3 interventions] compared to exercise alone. One study used an
ADF diet.

ModelStudy nameStatistics for each studyDifference in means and 95% CIDifference Standard Lower Upper in meanserrorVariancelimitlimitZ-Valuep-ValueBallor et al. 1988-2.6402.8227.961-8.1702.890-0.9360.349Batitucci et al. 2022-0.6401.2991.687-3.1851.905-0.4930.622Brini et al. 2020 a-0.8800.9280.861-2.6980.938-0.9490.343Brini et al. 2020 b-0.6400.5930.351-1.8020.522-1.0800.280Brini et al. 2021-1.0901.0291.059-3.1070.927-1.0590.290Cho et al. 2019-1.1000.8490.720-2.7630.563-1.2960.195Coker et al. 2009 a-3.0003.38211.438-9.6293.629-0.8870.375Hammer et al. 1989 a-0.4002.8017.844-5.8895.089-0.1430.886Hammer et al. 1989 b-0.7002.8187.939-6.2234.823-0.2480.804Hammer et al. 1989 c-1.1002.9568.739-6.8944.694-0.3720.710Hammer et al. 1989 d-1.8002.8548.146-7.3943.794-0.6310.528Jefferson et al. 2025-2.9002.3835.679-7.5711.771-1.2170.224Nicklas et al. 2015-1.6000.3090.095-2.205-0.995-5.1830.000Nicklas et al. 2018-2.0001.2101.463-4.3710.371-1.6530.098Nicklas et al. 2018b-2.5001.3001.689-5.0480.048-1.9230.054Nieman et l. 2000 a-2.7001.7212.961-6.0730.673-1.5690.117Stratton et al. 2020-0.1003.0749.448-6.1255.925-0.0330.974Tinseley et al. 2016a-1.0002.4926.212-5.8853.885-0.4010.688Tinseley et al. 2016b-1.0002.4005.760-5.7043.704-0.4170.677Tovar et al. 2021-1.1002.7807.731-6.5504.350-0.3960.692Weiss et al. 20160.6001.7963.226-2.9214.1210.3340.738Xu et al. 2022a0.9500.7280.530-0.4772.3771.3050.192Xu et al. 2022b0.5400.5130.263-0.4651.5451.0530.292Random-0.8260.2500.062-1.316-0.336-3.3040.001-12.00-6.000.006.0012.00Favours - IF & CRFavours - Exe onlyNutrients 2025, 17, 1992

33 of 43

Subgroup analyses by intervention duration revealed that combining IF or CR with
exercise led to significant reductions in BFP compared to exercise alone for short-term
interventions ≤ 8 weeks [WMD = −0.866% (95% CI −1.564 to −0.167), p = 0.01, 12 inter-
ventions], but not for long-term interventions >8 weeks [WMD = −0.921% (95% CI −1.962
to 0.120), p = 0.08, 11 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by days of diet/week revealed that combining IF or CR with
exercise led to significant reductions in BFP compared to exercise alone for >3 days/week
[WMD = −0.429% (95% CI −0.617 to −0.242), p = 0.001, 17 interventions], but not for
≤3 days/week [WMD = −0.157% (95% CI −0.497 to 0.182), p = 0.36, 6 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by type of exercise revealed that combining IF or CR with exer-
cise led to significant reductions in BFP compared to exercise alone for aerobic training
[WMD = −0.222% (95% CI −0.404 to −0.039), p = 0.01, 16 interventions] and resistance
training [WMD = −0.480% (95% CI −0.854 to −0.105), p = 0.01, 6 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by training frequency revealed that combining IF or CR with
exercise led to significant reductions in BFP compared to exercise alone for high-frequency
> 3 sessions/week [WMD = −0.202% (95% CI −0.403 to −0.001), p = 0.04, 12 interventions]
and low-frequency ≤ 3 sessions/week [WMD = −0.513% (95% CI −0.753 to −0.273),
p = 0.001, 10 interventions].

Subgroup analyses by participant characteristics revealed that combining IF or CR
with exercise led to significant reductions in BFP compared to exercise alone for untrained
[WMD = −0.305% (95% CI −0.521 to −0.089), p = 0.006, 16 interventions], but not for
trained participants [WMD = −0.276% (95% CI −0.619 to 0.067), p = 0.11, 7 interventions].
Subgroup analyses by gender revealed that combining IF or CR with exercise led to
no significant changes in BFP compared to exercise alone for females [WMD = −0.290%
(95% CI −0.606 to 0.027), p = 0.07, seven interventions], or males [WMD = −0.276% (95% CI
−0.619 to 0.067), p = 0.11, seven interventions]. Nine studies included both male and
female participants.

3.5. Quality Assessment

The PEDro tool was used to assess the methodological quality of each individual study,
with scores ranging from 4 to 7 out of a possible maximum of 9 points. Two studies had
a score of 4 [53,57], 12 studies had scores of 5 [22,33,35,37,38,47,51,55,56,58,59,61], 14 studies
had scores of 6 [31,34,39,41–43,45,48–50,52,60,62], 7 studies had scores of 7 [23,32,36,40,44,46,54].
Most of the PEDro scores were lowered due to two items (concealed allocation, and
intention-to-treat analysis). The details of the quality analysis are shown in Supplementary
Table S2.

4. Discussion

This meta-analysis explored the effects of combining IF (both hypocaloric and
eucaloric) and CR with exercise on endurance performance, strength, and body com-
position. The findings suggest that integrating IF and CR into exercise programs offers
notable benefits, particularly in weight loss and improvements in adiposity, without nega-
tively impacting exercise performance. Specifically, while IF and CR paired with exercise
did not significantly enhance VO2max, aerobic performance, gait speed, or upper- and
lower-body strength, a minor increase in handgrip strength was observed; however, the
clinical relevance of this change (−1.7 kg) remains unclear, as it is unlikely to contribute to
significant functional improvements in this context. However, the analysis indicated that
combining IF and CR with exercise resulted in greater reductions in body weight, BFP, and
FM compared to exercise alone, while also reducing FFM (−1.65 kg, p = 0.001), which is an
unfavorable outcome.

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

34 of 43

FFM, which includes muscle mass in addition to water, bones, minerals, proteins,
organs, and other lean tissues [64], is often lost along with FM during a caloric deficit,
particularly in situations where dietary protein intake is insufficient to preserve lean tissue.
Typically, approximately 20–40% of total weight loss can be attributed to FFM, with the
remaining portion coming from FM [65]. Correspondingly, we observed nearly twice the
reduction in FM (−2.86 kg) compared to FFM. Given the difficulty in accessing muscle
mass directly, a substantial portion of the FFM loss was likely attributable to water. It is
well-established that during the initial days of a caloric deficit, total body water loss can
account for 1–2 kg, which may represent up to ~70% of the early weight loss. This is largely
due to the depletion of glycogen stores, approximately 500 g of glycogen (~400 g in muscle
and ~100 g in the liver) with each gram of glycogen binding roughly 4 g of water. Over
time, as the deficit becomes more chronic, the body shifts toward losing primarily FM and
protein, with estimates suggesting that ~85% of the total body weight loss derives from fat
and ~15% from protein [65,66]. Considering glycogen as a component of FFM, avoiding CR
and carbohydrate depletion in the lead-up to competition may be advisable for athletes [67].
Preserving or even increasing glycogen stores through carbohydrate supercompensation is
a well-supported strategy to optimize performance, irrespective of the specific carbohydrate
source or timing [68–70]. In this context, our meta-analysis highlights the potential for
strategically implementing hypocaloric IF combined with exercise as part of a broader
nutrition periodization plan.

The preservation of FFM during IF and exercise remains debated, as IF can induce
a caloric deficit that, if not managed with adequate protein intake, may impair FFM
maintenance. The balance between energy intake and expenditure is crucial for preserving
muscle mass while achieving fat loss. Both exercise and feeding promote mechanistic target
of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway signaling, which activates several biosynthetic pathways.
However, factors such as protein intake, the magnitude of the caloric deficit, and daily
energy expenditure, which are inconsistently reported in studies, also likely influence FFM
preservation [14]. Notably, trained individuals experience less significant body composition
changes compared to untrained individuals, as their body composition is more strongly
influenced by training-related energy expenditure rather than by diet alone [71]. This
suggests that the impact of dietary interventions may be less pronounced in individuals
with a well-established exercise regimen. More specifically, a daily protein intake of
1.7–2.2 g/kg has been suggested to mitigate FFM loss due to its structural role in skeletal
muscle, particularly in those undergoing energy restriction or exercise [72]. Recent studies
suggest that myofibrillar protein synthesis can be preserved under IF and CR, which is a
validated measure of acute muscle hypertrophy. This preservation of protein synthesis may
play a role in maintaining FFM during energy restriction, as increased protein turnover
helps prevent the loss of skeletal muscle [73,74]. A typical IF regimen (e.g., TRF with an
eight-hour eating window) does not reduce daily rates of myofibrillar protein synthesis, a
validated measure of acute muscle hypertrophy, when compared to an isocaloric diet with
equivalent protein content [73]. Finally, short-term (10 days) ADF and CR did not impair
MPS rates, despite similar losses of FFM and FM, when both diets were compared to an
energy-balanced control diet with matched protein intake, at least in middle-aged males
with overweight or obesity [74]. This finding suggests that, under certain conditions, IF
and CR may not have detrimental effects on MPS rates.

Although we observed greater improvements in weight loss and adiposity with IF and
CR combined with exercise compared to exercise alone, the overall impact of IF regimens
on body weight and FM loss is similar to other diets with matched energy intake [75–77].
However, IF combined with exercise may offer additional benefits related to metabolic
flexibility and adherence to dietary regimens. The decrease in energy intake remains the

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

35 of 43

primary mechanism for inducing weight loss; however, appetite management is crucial,
with an estimated increase in energy intake of 100 kcal/day per kilogram of weight lost [78].
No wonder that long-term success in preventing weight regain remains a challenge in
both modern pharmacotherapy and non-pharmacological strategies involving diet and
exercise [79–81]. There is hope that IF may result in less hunger compared to regular
meals; however, on the flip side, IF can also sharply trigger hunger. A systematic review
of 16 studies showed that TRE (daily eating window of ≤12 h) did not lead to significant
increases in hunger or other appetite-related measures, but it was associated with higher
appetite at bedtime [82]. Skipping breakfast can be considered a form of TRE; however,
it presents a dilemma when it comes to weight loss [83,84]. A high-calorie breakfast and
low-calorie dinner increased the thermic effect of food by a factor of 2.5 compared to a
calorie-equated diet with a high-calorie dinner and low-calorie breakfast in normal-weight
men, suggesting that meal timing may influence energy expenditure and metabolic pro-
cesses. This highlights the potential metabolic benefits associated with chrononutrition [85].
However, introducing breakfast earlier in women who regularly skipped breakfast resulted
in an increase in energy intake (~270 kcal), as well as a rise in body weight by 600 g and
FM by 500 g over four weeks compared to a group that continued to skip breakfast [86].

Exercise intervention alone is not a strong inducer of FM loss, as the extent of fat
loss often depends on the combination of exercise with dietary changes. While exercise
increases energy expenditure, it may not be sufficient to achieve substantial FM reductions
without dietary adjustments. For example, common resistance training interventions
result in an estimated loss of 600 g of FM [87], while typical aerobic training protocols,
including those of moderate and high intensity, are associated with a loss of 1 to 3 kg
of FM [88]. Epidemiologically, total energy expenditure plateaus in the higher ranges of
physical activity, supporting a constrained total energy expenditure model and highlighting
the challenge of weight loss even in physically active individuals [89], after adjusting for
body size and composition. Although resistance training is more specific for muscle
hypertrophy and strength [90–92], some level of aerobic training can also partially enhance
muscle hypertrophy and related metabolic pathways [93,94]. Although our meta-analysis
encompassed various exercise protocols, combined or not, and recognizing that all types
of exercise can provide benefits to body composition and performance, the most effective
non-pharmacological strategy for addressing obesity outcomes is to combine CR (either
through regular meals or IF regimens) with a mix of aerobic and resistance training. If
only one option must be chosen, resistance training is preferred. In addition, maintaining a
proper protein intake (at least 1.1–1.7 g/kg/body weight) and a moderate caloric deficit of
500–1000 kcal are key nutritional targets for optimizing body recomposition [95].

When evaluating performance, the lack of significant changes in key parameters from
combining IF or CR with exercise aligns with recent literature. For instance, Conde-Pipó et al.
concluded that IF does not negatively impact sports performance and could be a viable di-
etary strategy for athletes, with potential performance declines being more likely attributed
to factors such as inadequate rest and hydration [2]. Conversely, a recent systematic review
and meta-analysis examining TRF over 4–8 weeks reported positive effects on weight
loss and cardiometabolic variables, although negative effects were observed during Ra-
madan fasting [12]. These conclusions were based on 11 studies involving 485 participants;
however, high heterogeneity among the studies warrants caution in interpretation.

It is important to note that IF and CR combined with exercise increased handgrip
strength by approximately 1.7 kg compared to exercise alone, a result that is clinically
questionable and lacks specificity depending on the type of sport and its relevance in
clinical settings. The absence of adequate blinding in dietary interventions, similar to
what is commonly used for medications or supplements, as well as the small number of

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

36 of 43

studies (five), may influence the outcome. Epidemiologically, a 1 kg increase in handgrip
strength is associated with a 3.2% reduction in all-cause mortality and a 6% reduction in
respiratory mortality among older individuals [96,97]. However, while some studies in our
meta-analysis included older adults, most focused on younger individuals without serious
clinical concerns.

Although handgrip strength has been shown to be a predictor of upper, lower, and total
strength, a recent systematic review reveals variability in the correlations between handgrip
strength and muscle torque. Therefore, caution should be exercised when using hand-
grip strength alone as a measure. The neutral effects we observed for other strength and
functional parameters outweigh the clinically questionable increase in handgrip strength.
Mechanistically, changes in body composition, cardiovascular function, and metabolic
parameters may contribute to performance improvements [98]. However, many studies
have failed to replicate the metabolic changes observed in animal models, suggesting that
species-specific differences may limit the direct translation of animal model findings to
human populations [99]. More specifically, the positive effects on handgrip strength may
be attributed to other variables. For instance, baseline differences in body weight and
BMI between the exercise and IF groups, as observed in the study by Batitucci et al. [58]
could explain the variations in handgrip strength adaptations [100]. Additionally, re-
ductions in adiposity may positively influence strength outcomes [101], as suggested by
Nicklas et al. [44] and Bouhlel et al. [35], though further research is required to confirm
these findings. Overall, the evidence suggests that IF and CR regimens do not significantly
impact exercise performance, making them suitable for integration into personalized and
periodized nutrition plans without compromising performance [102].

The consistent finding of enhanced weight and fat loss when combining IF and CR with
exercise is supported by recent literature. For instance, Correa et al. reported that TRF regi-
mens were associated with significant weight loss (WMD: −1.07 kg, 95% CI: −1.74 to −0.40;
p = 0.002) and reduced fasting glucose levels (WMD: −1.71 mg/dL, 95% CI: −3.20 to −0.21;
p = 0.03), particularly in RCTs. Similarly, our analysis of 27 interventions found significant
FFM loss when combining IF and CR with exercise, irrespective of exercise type. However,
Keenan et al. [103] concluded that FFM is preserved when IF is combined with resistance
training, although their review only included studies where exercise was performed in the
fed state and lacked a control diet group. The mechanisms underlying the weight-lowering
effects of IF and CR with exercise are multifaceted. For example, fasted-state exercise
enhances fat oxidation compared to the fed state, driven by differences in glycemia and
insulinemia [104]. Additionally, IF combined with exercise increases AMPK signaling,
activating fat-oxidation pathways involving proteins such as fatty acid translocase/cluster
of differentiation 36 (FAT-CD36), carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 (CPT1), and pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4) [105–107], and citrate synthase, which improve intramus-
cular triacylglycerol and fatty acid utilization [99,108]. While the long-term regulation of
these mechanisms remains understudied, they may explain the positive effects observed in
both short- and long-term interventions. Exercise intensity also plays a role, with low- to
moderate-intensity fasted exercise (45–65% VO2max) enhancing lipid metabolism, whereas
high-intensity exercise (85% VO2max) shows no significant differences [109].

This study has several strengths, including a comprehensive evaluation of IF regimens
combined with exercise across multiple outcomes and a rigorous selection of studies
through a systematic review. This approach helps reduce bias and heterogeneity, ensuring
that the findings are robust and reliable. In addition to the various metabolic benefits
of IF and CR in both athletic and clinical settings [102,110–114], our findings expand
knowledge by providing practical insights for both athletes and non-athletes regarding
exercise performance and body composition. Specifically, we demonstrate that combining

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

37 of 43

IF and CR diets with exercise did not impair performance while effectively reducing body
weight and adiposity, suggesting positive physiological adaptations. However, variations
in participant health characteristics, such as baseline body composition, and differences
in intervention durations may have influenced the results. While this analysis evaluated
numerous health and performance outcomes, the limited number of studies available for
subgroup analyses based on exercise type, duration, and intensity underscores the need for
further research. Lastly, while IF is generally considered safe, caution should be exercised
in individuals with diabetes, particularly those on insulin therapy, as disturbances in blood
glucose may occur if not properly monitored. This is especially relevant during exercise,
as changes in glucose utilization could affect performance and overall safety [115]. Such
a concern is particularly relevant when IF is combined with CR and exercise, as lower
carbohydrate intake and increased carbohydrate oxidation are expected.

5. Conclusions

This meta-analysis underscores the practical implications of IF and caloric CR for
both athletes and non-athletes. Our findings demonstrate that IF (whether hypocaloric or
eucaloric) and CR can be effectively integrated with exercise training without compromising
performance. Furthermore, when the primary goal is to improve body composition, com-
bining IF or CR with exercise appears to be a viable strategy for reducing body weight and
adiposity, although strategies should be implemented to limit losses in FFM. These results
highlight the flexibility of IF and CR as dietary approaches that can be tailored to individual
needs and training goals. However, further research is needed to explore the long-term
effects, optimal protocols, and individual variability in response to these interventions.

Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https://
www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/nu17121992/s1, Table S1: Search strategy; Table S2: Quality of
studies assessment.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization: F.K. and R.B.; Methodology: F.K., F.S., A.B.K. and R.B.;
Formal analysis and investigation: F.K. and R.B. Writing—original draft preparation: F.K., R.B., R.B.C.,
R.K. and H.O.S.; Writing—review and editing: F.K., R.B., R.B.C., R.K., F.D. and H.O.S.; Supervision:
F.K. and R.B. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Data Availability Statement: All data used in the analyses are available on request to the corresponding
author.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References

1.
2.

3.

4.

5.

Santos, H.O. Intermittent fasting and fat mass: What is the clinical magnitude? Obesities 2022, 2, 1–7. [CrossRef]
Conde-Pipó, J.; Mora-Fernandez, A.; Martinez-Bebia, M.; Gimenez-Blasi, N.; Lopez-Moro, A.; Latorre, J.A.; Almendros-Ruiz, A.;
Requena, B.; Mariscal-Arcas, M. Intermittent fasting: Does it affect sports performance? A systematic review. Nutrients 2024,
16, 168. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Pellegrini, M.; Cioffi, I.; Evangelista, A.; Ponzo, V.; Goitre, I.; Ciccone, G.; Ghigo, E.; Bo, S. Effects of time-restricted feeding on
body weight and metabolism. A systematic review and meta-analysis. Rev. Endocr. Metab. Disord. 2020, 21, 17–33. [CrossRef]
Park, J.; Seo, Y.-G.; Paek, Y.-J.; Song, H.J.; Park, K.H.; Noh, H.-M. Effect of alternate-day fasting on obesity and cardiometabolic
risk: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Metabolism 2020, 111, 154336. [CrossRef]
Elortegui Pascual, P.; Rolands, M.R.; Eldridge, A.L.; Kassis, A.; Mainardi, F.; Lê, K.A.; Karagounis, L.G.; Gut, P.; Varady, K.A.
A Meta-Analysis comparing the effectiveness of alternate day fasting, the 5, 2 diet, and Time-Restricted eating for weight loss.
Obesity 2023, 31, 9–21. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

38 of 43

6.

7.

Zouhal, H.; Bagheri, R.; Triki, R.; Saeidi, A.; Wong, A.; Hackney, A.C.; Laher, I.; Suzuki, K.; Ben Abderrahman, A. Effects of
Ramadan intermittent fasting on gut hormones and body composition in males with obesity. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health
2020, 17, 5600. [CrossRef]
Santos, H.O.; Genario, R.; Tinsley, G.M.; Ribeiro, P.; Carteri, R.B.; de Faria Coelho-Ravagnani, C.; Mota, J.F. A scoping review of
intermittent fasting, chronobiology, and metabolism. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2022, 115, 991–1004. [CrossRef]

8. Most, J.; Tosti, V.; Redman, L.M.; Fontana, L. Calorie restriction in humans: An update. Ageing Res. Rev. 2017, 39, 36–45. [CrossRef]
Chung, H.Y.; Kim, D.H.; Bang, E.; Yu, B.P. Impacts of calorie restriction and intermittent fasting on health and diseases: Current
9.
trends. Nutrients 2020, 12, 2948. [CrossRef]

10. Ashtary-Larky, D.; Bagheri, R.; Tinsley, G.M.; Asbaghi, O.; Paoli, A.; Moro, T. Effects of intermittent fasting combined with

resistance training on body composition: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Physiol. Behav. 2021, 237, 113453. [CrossRef]

11. Levy, E.; Chu, T. Intermittent fasting and its effects on athletic performance: A review. Curr. Sports Med. Rep. 2019, 18, 266–269.

[CrossRef]

12. Correia, J.M.; Santos, I.; Pezarat-Correia, P.; Minderico, C.; Mendonca, G.V. Effects of intermittent fasting on specific exercise

performance outcomes: A systematic review including meta-analysis. Nutrients 2020, 12, 1390. [CrossRef]

13. Grundler, F.; Mesnage, R.; Ruppert, P.M.; Kouretas, D.; Wilhelmi de Toledo, F. Long-Term Fasting-Induced Ketosis in 1610 Subjects:

Metabolic Regulation and Safety. Nutrients 2024, 16, 1849. [CrossRef]

14. Murphy, C.; Koehler, K. Energy deficiency impairs resistance training gains in lean mass but not strength: A meta-analysis and

meta-regression. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 2022, 32, 125–137. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

15. Karl, J.P.; Thompson, L.A.; Niro, P.J.; Margolis, L.M.; McClung, J.P.; Cao, J.J.; Whigham, L.D.; Combs, G.F., Jr.; Young, A.J.;
Lieberman, H.R.; et al. Transient decrements in mood during energy deficit are independent of dietary protein-to-carbohydrate
ratio. Physiol. Behav. 2015, 139, 524–531. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

16. Wang, Y.; Wu, R. The effect of fasting on human metabolism and psychological health. Dis. Markers 2022, 2022, 5653739. [CrossRef]

[PubMed]

17. Abaidia, A.-E.; Daab, W.; Bouzid, M.A. Effects of Ramadan fasting on physical performance: A systematic review with meta-

analysis. Sports Med. 2020, 50, 1009–1026. [CrossRef]

18. BaHammam, A. Assessment of sleep patterns, daytime sleepiness, and chronotype during Ramadan in fasting and nonfasting

individuals. Saudi Med. J. 2005, 26, 616–622.

19. Waterhouse, J.; Alkib, L.; Reilly, T. Effects of Ramadan upon fluid and food intake, fatigue, and physical, mental, and social

activities: A comparison between the UK and Libya. Chronobiol. Int. 2008, 25, 697–724. [CrossRef]

20. Hedrington, M.S.; Davis, S.N. Sexual dimorphism in glucose and lipid metabolism during fasting, hypoglycemia, and exercise.

21.

Front. Endocrinol. 2015, 6, 61. [CrossRef]
Soeters, M.R.; Sauerwein, H.P.; Groener, J.E.; Aerts, J.M.; Ackermans, M.T.; Glatz, J.F.; Fliers, E.; Serlie, M.J. Gender-related
differences in the metabolic response to fasting. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2007, 92, 3646–3652. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

22. Tinsley, G.M.; Forsse, J.S.; Butler, N.K.; Paoli, A.; Bane, A.A.; La Bounty, P.M.; Morgan, G.B.; Grandjean, P.W. Time-restricted
feeding in young men performing resistance training: A randomized controlled trial. Eur. J. Sport Sci. 2017, 17, 200–207. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

23. Moro, T.; Tinsley, G.; Bianco, A.; Marcolin, G.; Pacelli, Q.F.; Battaglia, G.; Palma, A.; Gentil, P.; Neri, M.; Paoli, A. Effects of
eight weeks of time-restricted feeding (16/8) on basal metabolism, maximal strength, body composition, inflammation, and
cardiovascular risk factors in resistance-trained males. J. Transl. Med. 2016, 14, 290. [CrossRef]

24. Tinsley, G.M.; Moore, M.L.; Graybeal, A.J.; Paoli, A.; Kim, Y.; Gonzales, J.U.; Harry, J.R.; VanDusseldorp, T.A.; Kennedy, D.N.;
Cruz, M.R. Time-restricted feeding plus resistance training in active females: A randomized trial. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2019,
110, 628–640. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

25. Kolnes, K.J.; Nilsen, E.T.; Brufladt, S.; Meadows, A.M.; Jeppesen, P.B.; Skattebo, Ø.; Johansen, E.I.; Birk, J.B.; Højlund, K.; Hingst, J.;
et al. Effects of seven days’ fasting on physical performance and metabolic adaptation during exercise in humans. Nat. Commun.
2025, 16, 122. [CrossRef]

26. Moher, D.; Liberati, A.; Tetzlaff, J.; Altman, D.G.; PRISMA Group. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and

meta-analyses: The PRISMA statement. Ann. Intern. Med. 2009, 151, 264–269. [CrossRef]

27. Higgins, J.P.; Green, S. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions; The Cochrane Collaboration: London, UK, 2008.
28. De Morton, N.A. The PEDro scale is a valid measure of the methodological quality of clinical trials: A demographic study. Aust. J.

Physiother. 2009, 55, 129–133. [CrossRef]

29. Egger, M.; Smith, G.D.; Schneider, M.; Minder, C. Bias in meta-analysis detected by a simple, graphical test. BMJ 1997, 315, 629–634.

[CrossRef]

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

39 of 43

30. Tufanaru, C.; Munn, Z.; Stephenson, M.; Aromataris, E. Fixed or random effects meta-analysis? Common methodological issues

in systematic reviews of effectiveness. JBI Evid. Implement. 2015, 13, 196–207. [CrossRef]

31. Correia, J.M.; Pezarat-Correia, P.; Minderico, C.; Infante, J.; Mendonca, G.V. Effects of Time-Restricted Eating on Aerobic Capacity,
Body Composition, and Markers of Metabolic Health in Healthy Male Recreational Runners: A Randomized Crossover Trial. J.
Acad. Nutr. Diet. 2024, 124, 1041–1050. [CrossRef]

32. Nicklas, B.J.; Brinkley, T.E.; Houston, D.K.; Lyles, M.F.; Hugenschmidt, C.E.; Beavers, K.M.; Leng, X. Effects of Caloric Restriction
on Cardiorespiratory Fitness, Fatigue, and Disability Responses to Aerobic Exercise in Older Adults With Obesity: A Randomized
Controlled Trial. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 2019, 74, 1084–1090. [CrossRef]

33. Kirkendall, D.T.; Leiper, J.B.; Bartagi, Z.; Dvorak, J.; Zerguini, Y. The influence of Ramadan on physical performance measures in

young Muslim footballers. J. Sports Sci. 2008, 26 (Suppl. 3), S15–S27. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

34. Wang, Z.M.; Leng, X.; Messi, M.L.; Choi, S.J.; Marsh, A.P.; Nicklas, B.; Delbono, O. Relationship of Physical Function to Single
Muscle Fiber Contractility in Older Adults: Effects of Resistance Training With and Without Caloric Restriction. J. Gerontol. A Biol.
Sci. Med. Sci. 2019, 74, 412–419. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

35. Bouhlel, H.; Shephard, R.J.; Gmada, N.; Aouichaoui, C.; Peres, G.; Tabka, Z.; Bouhlel, E. Effect of Ramadan observance on maximal

muscular performance of trained men. Clin. J. Sport Med. 2013, 23, 222–227. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

36. Moro, T.; Tinsley, G.; Longo, G.; Grigoletto, D.; Bianco, A.; Ferraris, C.; Guglielmetti, M.; Veneto, A.; Tagliabue, A.; Marcolin, G.;
et al. Time-restricted eating effects on performance, immune function, and body composition in elite cyclists: A randomized
controlled trial. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr. 2020, 17, 65. [CrossRef]

37. Yassine, H.N.; Marchetti, C.M.; Krishnan, R.K.; Vrobel, T.R.; Gonzalez, F.; Kirwan, J.P. Effects of exercise and caloric restriction on
insulin resistance and cardiometabolic risk factors in older obese adults—A randomized clinical trial. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med.
Sci. 2009, 64, 90–95. [CrossRef]

38. Christiansen, T.; Paulsen, S.K.; Bruun, J.M.; Ploug, T.; Pedersen, S.B.; Richelsen, B. Diet-induced weight loss and exercise alone
and in combination enhance the expression of adiponectin receptors in adipose tissue and skeletal muscle, but only diet-induced
weight loss enhanced circulating adiponectin. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2010, 95, 911–919. [CrossRef]

39. Coker, R.H.; Williams, R.H.; Yeo, S.E.; Kortebein, P.M.; Bodenner, D.L.; Kern, P.A.; Evans, W.J. The impact of exercise training
J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2009,

compared to caloric restriction on hepatic and peripheral insulin resistance in obesity.
94, 4258–4266. [CrossRef]

40. Cooke, M.B.; Deasy, W.; Ritenis, E.J.; Wilson, R.A.; Stathis, C.G. Effects of Intermittent Energy Restriction Alone and in Combina-
tion with Sprint Interval Training on Body Composition and Cardiometabolic Biomarkers in Individuals with Overweight and
Obesity. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 7969. [CrossRef]

41. Hagan, R.D.; Upton, S.J.; Wong, L.; Whittam, J. The effects of aerobic conditioning and/or caloric restriction in overweight men

42.

and women. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 1986, 18, 87–94. [CrossRef]
Jefferson, M.E.; Nicklas, B.J.; Chmelo, E.A.; Crotts, C.I.; Shaltout, H.A.; Diz, D.I.; Marsh, A.P.; Brinkley, T.E. Effects of resistance
training with and without caloric restriction on arterial stiffness in overweight and obese older adults. Am. J. Hypertens. 2016,
29, 494–500. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

43. Kotarsky, C.J.; Johnson, N.R.; Mahoney, S.J.; Mitchell, S.L.; Schimek, R.L.; Stastny, S.N.; Hackney, K.J. Time-restricted eating
and concurrent exercise training reduces fat mass and increases lean mass in overweight and obese adults. Physiol. Rep. 2021,
9, e14868. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

44. Nicklas, B.J.; Chmelo, E.; Delbono, O.; Carr, J.J.; Lyles, M.F.; Marsh, A.P. Effects of resistance training with and without caloric
restriction on physical function and mobility in overweight and obese older adults: A randomized controlled trial. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr. 2015, 101, 991–999. [CrossRef]

45. Weiss, E.P.; Albert, S.G.; Reeds, D.N.; Kress, K.S.; McDaniel, J.L.; Klein, S.; Villareal, D.T. Effects of matched weight loss from
calorie restriction, exercise, or both on cardiovascular disease risk factors: A randomized intervention trial. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
2016, 104, 576–586. [CrossRef]

46. Xu, R.; Cao, Y.X.; Chen, Y.T.; Jia, Y.Q. Differential effects of intermittent energy restriction vs. continuous energy restriction
combined high-intensity interval training on overweight/obese adults: A randomized controlled trial. Front. Nutr. 2022, 9, 979618.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

47. Brady, A.J.; Langton, H.M.; Mulligan, M.; Egan, B. Effects of 8 wk of 16, 8 Time-restricted Eating in Male Middle- and Long-

Distance Runners. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2021, 53, 633–642. [CrossRef]

48. Brini, S.; Marzouki, H.; Ouerghi, N.; Ouergui, I.; Castagna, C.; Bouassida, A. Effects of Ramadan observance combined with
two training programs on plasma lipids and testosterone/cortisol ratio in male senior basketball players. Med. Dello Sport 2019,
72, 47–58. [CrossRef]

49. Brini, S.; Ouerghi, N.; Bouassida, A. Small sided games vs repeated sprint training effects on agility in fasting basketball players.

Rev. Bras. Med. Esporte 2020, 26, 248–252. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

40 of 43

50. Brini, S.; Castillo, D.; Raya-González, J.; Castagna, C.; Bouassida, A.; Khalifa, R.; Chortane, S.G.; Clemente, F.M. Basketball-specific
small-sided games training during Ramadan intermitting fasting: Do changes in body composition, sleep habits, and perceived
exertion affect technical performance? Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 16, 12008. [CrossRef]

51. Brisswalter, J.; Bouhlel, E.; Falola, J.M.; Abbiss, C.R.; Vallier, J.M.; Hauswirth, C. Effects of Ramadan intermittent fasting on

middle-distance running performance in well-trained runners. Clin. J. Sport Med. 2011, 21, 422–427. [CrossRef]

52. Correia, J.M.; Santos, P.D.G.; Pezarat-Correia, P.; Minderico, C.S.; Infante, J.; Mendonca, G.V. Effect of Time-Restricted Eating and

Resistance Training on High-Speed Strength and Body Composition. Nutrients 2023, 15, 285. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

53. Cox, K.L.; Burke, V.; Morton, A.R.; Beilin, L.J.; Puddey, I.B. Independent and additive effects of energy restriction and exercise on

glucose and insulin concentrations in sedentary overweight men. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2004, 80, 308–316. [CrossRef]

54. Moro, T.; Tinsley, G.; Pacelli, F.Q.; Marcolin, G.; Bianco, A.; Paoli, A. Twelve Months of Time-restricted Eating and Resistance
Training Improves Inflammatory Markers and Cardiometabolic Risk Factors. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2021, 53, 2577–2585.
[CrossRef]
Stratton, M.T.; Hester, G.M.; Alesi, M.G.; Modjeski, A.S.; King, K.; Olmos, A.A.; Serafini, P.R.; Savage, S.N.; Webb, A.T.; Tinsley,
G.M.; et al. Four Weeks of Time-Restricted Feeding Combined with Resistance Training Does Not Differentially Influence
Measures of Body Composition, Muscle Performance, Resting Energy Expenditure, and Blood Biomarkers. Nutrients 2020,
12, 1126. [CrossRef]

55.

56. Tovar, A.P.; Richardson, C.E.; Keim, N.L.; Van Loan, M.D.; Davis, B.A.; Casazza, G.A. Four weeks of 16/8 time restrictive feeding
in endurance trained male runners decreases fat mass, without affecting exercise performance. Nutrients 2021, 13, 2941. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

57. Ballor, D.L.; Katch, V.L.; Becque, M.D.; Marks, C.R. Resistance weight training during caloric restriction enhances lean body

weight maintenance. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1988, 47, 19–25. [CrossRef]

58. Batitucci, G.; Faria Junior, E.V.; Nogueira, J.E.; Brandão, C.F.; Abud, G.F.; Ortiz, G.U.; Marchini, J.S.; Freitas, E.C. Impact of
Intermittent Fasting Combined With High-Intensity Interval Training on Body Composition, Metabolic Biomarkers, and Physical
Fitness in Women With Obesity. Front. Nutr. 2022, 9, 884305. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

59. Habermann, N.; Makar, K.W.; Abbenhardt, C.; Xiao, L.; Wang, C.Y.; Utsugi, H.K.; Alfano, C.M.; Campbell, K.L.; Duggan, C.;
Foster-Schubert, K.E.; et al. No effect of caloric restriction or exercise on radiation repair capacity. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2015,
47, 896–904. [CrossRef]

60. Haganes, K.L.; Silva, C.P.; Eyjolfsdottir, S.K.; Steen, S.; Grindberg, M.; Lydersen, S.; Hawley, J.A.; Moholdt, T. Time-restricted
eating and exercise training improve HbA1c and body composition in women with overweight/obesity: A randomized controlled
trial. Cell Metab. 2022, 34, 1457–1471.e4. [CrossRef]

61. Hammer, R.L.; Barrier, C.A.; Roundy, E.S.; Bradford, J.M.; Fisher, A.G. Calorie-restricted low-fat diet and exercise in obese women.

Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1989, 49, 77–85. [CrossRef]

62. Nieman, D.C.; Custer, W.F.; Butterworth, D.E.; Utter, A.C.; Henson, D.A. Psychological response to exercise training and/or

energy restriction in obese women. J. Psychosom. Res. 2000, 48, 23–29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

63. Cho, A.R.; Moon, J.Y.; Kim, S.; An, K.Y.; Oh, M.; Jeon, J.Y.; Jung, D.-H.; Choi, M.H.; Lee, J.-W. Effects of alternate day fasting and
exercise on cholesterol metabolism in overweight or obese adults: A pilot randomized controlled trial. Metabolism 2019, 93, 52–60.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

64. Heymsfield, S.B.; Brown, J.; Ramirez, S.; Prado, C.M.; Tinsley, G.M.; Gonzalez, M.C. Are Lean Body Mass and Fat-Free Mass the

Same or Different Body Components? A Critical Perspective. Adv. Nutr. 2024, 15, 100335. [CrossRef]

65. Heymsfield, S.B.; Gonzalez, M.C.; Shen, W.; Redman, L.; Thomas, D. Weight loss composition is one-fourth fat-free mass:

A critical review and critique of this widely cited rule. Obes. Rev. 2014, 15, 310–321. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

66. Olsson, K.E.; Saltin, B. Variation in total body water with muscle glycogen changes in man. Acta Physiol. Scand. 1970, 80, 11–18.

[CrossRef]

67. de Moraes, W.M.; de Almeida, F.N.; Dos Santos, L.E.; Cavalcante, K.D.; Santos, H.O.; Navalta, J.W.; Prestes, J. Carbohydrate
loading practice in bodybuilders: Effects on muscle thickness, photo silhouette scores, mood states and gastrointestinal symptoms.
J. Sports Sci. Med. 2019, 18, 772.

68. Doering, T.M.; Cox, G.R.; Areta, J.L.; Coffey, V.G. Repeated muscle glycogen supercompensation with four days’ recovery between

exhaustive exercise. J. Sci. Med. Sport 2019, 22, 907–911. [CrossRef]

69. Macedo, R.C.; Santos, H.O.; Tinsley, G.M.; Reischak-Oliveira, A. Low-carbohydrate diets: Effects on metabolism and exercise–A

comprehensive literature review. Clin. Nutr. ESPEN 2020, 40, 17–26. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

70. Vlahoyiannis, A.; Andreou, E.; Aphamis, G.; Felekkis, K.; Pieri, M.; Sakkas, G.K.; Giannaki, C.D. Evaluating the evening
carbohydrate dilemma: The effect of within-the-day carbohydrate periodization on body composition and physical fitness. Eur. J.
Nutr. 2025, 64, 23. [CrossRef]

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

41 of 43

71. Methenitis, S.; Feidantsis, K.; Kaprara, A.; Hatzitolios, A.; Skepastianos, P.; Papadopoulou, S.K.; Panayiotou, G. Body Composition,
Fasting Blood Glucose and Lipidemic Indices Are Not Primarily Determined by the Nutritional Intake of Middle-Aged Endurance
Trained Men—Another “Athletes’ Paradox”? J. Clin. Med. 2022, 11, 6057. [CrossRef]

72. Kerksick, C.M.; Wilborn, C.D.; Roberts, M.D.; Smith-Ryan, A.; Kleiner, S.M.; Jäger, R.; Collins, R.; Cooke, M.; Davis, J.N.; Galvan,
E.; et al. ISSN exercise & sports nutrition review update: Research & recommendations. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr. 2018, 15, 38.
[PubMed]

73. Parr, E.B.; Kouw, I.W.; Wheeler, M.J.; Radford, B.E.; Hall, R.C.; Senden, J.M.; Goessens, J.P.; Van Loon, L.J.; Hawley, J.A. Eight-
hour time-restricted eating does not lower daily myofibrillar protein synthesis rates: A randomized control trial. Obesity 2023,
31, 116–126. [CrossRef]

74. Kouw, I.W.; Parr, E.B.; Wheeler, M.J.; Radford, B.E.; Hall, R.C.; Senden, J.M.; Goessens, J.P.; van Loon, L.J.; Hawley, J.A. Short-term
intermittent fasting and energy restriction do not impair rates of muscle protein synthesis: A randomised, controlled dietary
intervention. Clin. Nutr. 2024, 43, 174–184. [CrossRef]

75. Liu, D.; Huang, Y.; Huang, C.; Yang, S.; Wei, X.; Zhang, P.; Guo, D.; Lin, J.; Xu, B.; Li, C.; et al. Calorie restriction with or without

time-restricted eating in weight loss. N. Engl. J. Med. 2022, 386, 1495–1504. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

76. Trepanowski, J.F.; Kroeger, C.M.; Barnosky, A.; Klempel, M.C.; Bhutani, S.; Hoddy, K.K.; Gabel, K.; Freels, S.; Rigdon, J.; Rood, J.;
et al. Effect of alternate-day fasting on weight loss, weight maintenance, and cardioprotection among metabolically healthy obese
adults: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern. Med. 2017, 177, 930–938. [CrossRef]

77. Lowe, D.A.; Wu, N.; Rohdin-Bibby, L.; Moore, A.H.; Kelly, N.; Liu, Y.E.; Philip, E.; Vittinghoff, E.; Heymsfield, S.B.; Olgin, J.E.;
et al. Effects of time-restricted eating on weight loss and other metabolic parameters in women and men with overweight and
obesity: The TREAT randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern. Med. 2020, 180, 1491–1499. [CrossRef]

78. Polidori, D.; Sanghvi, A.; Seeley, R.J.; Hall, K.D. How strongly does appetite counter weight loss? Quantification of the feedback

79.

80.

control of human energy intake. Obesity 2016, 24, 2289–2295. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Jensen, S.B.K.; Blond, M.B.; Sandsdal, R.M.; Olsen, L.M.; Juhl, C.R.; Lundgren, J.R.; Janus, C.; Stallknecht, B.M.; Holst, J.J.;
Madsbad, S.; et al. Healthy weight loss maintenance with exercise, GLP-1 receptor agonist, or both combined followed by one
year without treatment: A post-treatment analysis of a randomised placebo-controlled trial. EClinicalMedicine 2024, 69, 102475.
[CrossRef]
Fothergill, E.; Guo, J.; Howard, L.; Kerns, J.C.; Knuth, N.D.; Brychta, R.; Chen, K.Y.; Skarulis, M.C.; Walter, M.; Walter, P.J.; et al.
Persistent metabolic adaptation 6 years after “The Biggest Loser” competition. Obesity 2016, 24, 1612–1619. [CrossRef]

81. Berg, S.; Stickle, H.; Rose, S.J.; Nemec, E.C. Discontinuing glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists and body habitus:

A systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes. Rev. 2025, e13929. [CrossRef]

82. Vizthum, D.; Katz, S.E.; Pacanowski, C.R. The impact of time restricted eating on appetite and disordered eating in adults:

83.

84.

A mixed methods systematic review. Appetite 2023, 183, 106452. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Santos, H.O.; Tinsley, G.M. Is breakfast consumption detrimental, unnecessary, or an opportunity for health promotion? A review
of cardiometabolic outcomes and functional food choices. Diabetes/Metab. Res. Rev. 2024, 40, e3684. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Santos, H.O.; Genario, R.; Macedo, R.C.; Pareek, M.; Tinsley, G.M. Association of breakfast skipping with cardiovascular outcomes
and cardiometabolic risk factors: An updated review of clinical evidence. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2021, 62, 466–474. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

85. Richter, J.; Herzog, N.; Janka, S.; Baumann, T.; Kistenmacher, A.; Oltmanns, K.M. Twice as high diet-induced thermogenesis after
breakfast vs dinner on high-calorie as well as low-calorie meals. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2020, 105, e211–e221. [CrossRef]
86. LeCheminant, G.M.; LeCheminant, J.D.; Tucker, L.A.; Bailey, B.W. A randomized controlled trial to study the effects of breakfast
on energy intake, physical activity, and body fat in women who are nonhabitual breakfast eaters. Appetite 2017, 112, 44–51.
[CrossRef]

87. Wewege, M.A.; Desai, I.; Honey, C.; Coorie, B.; Jones, M.D.; Clifford, B.K.; Leake, H.B.; Hagstrom, A.D. The effect of resistance
training in healthy adults on body fat percentage, fat mass and visceral fat: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med.
2022, 52, 287–300. [CrossRef]
Jayedi, A.; Soltani, S.; Emadi, A.; Zargar, M.-S.; Najafi, A. Aerobic Exercise and Weight Loss in Adults: A Systematic Review and
Dose-Response Meta-Analysis. JAMA Netw. Open 2024, 7, e2452185. [CrossRef]

88.

89. Pontzer, H.; Durazo-Arvizu, R.; Dugas, L.R.; Plange-Rhule, J.; Bovet, P.; Forrester, T.E.; Lambert, E.V.; Cooper, R.S.; Schoeller, D.A.;
Luke, A. Constrained total energy expenditure and metabolic adaptation to physical activity in adult humans. Curr. Biol. 2016,
26, 410–417. [CrossRef]

90. Hudelmaier, M.; Wirth, W.; Himmer, M.; Ring-Dimitriou, S.; Sänger, A.; Eckstein, F. Effect of exercise intervention on thigh
muscle volume and anatomical cross-sectional areas—Quantitative assessment using MRI. Magn. Reson. Med. 2010, 64, 1713–1720.
[CrossRef]

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

42 of 43

91. Aube, D.; Wadhi, T.; Rauch, J.; Anand, A.; Barakat, C.; Pearson, J.; Bradshaw, J.; Zazzo, S.; Ugrinowitsch, C.; De Souza, E.O.
Progressive resistance training volume: Effects on muscle thickness, mass, and strength adaptations in resistance-trained
individuals. J. Strength Cond. Res. 2022, 36, 600–607. [CrossRef]
Fujita, T.; Brechue, W.F.; Kurita, K.; Sato, Y.; Abe, T. Increased muscle volume and strength following six days of low-intensity
resistance training with restricted muscle blood flow. Int. J. KAATSU Train. Res. 2008, 4, 1–8. [CrossRef]

92.

93. Konopka, A.R.; Suer, M.K.; Wolff, C.A.; Harber, M.P. Markers of human skeletal muscle mitochondrial biogenesis and quality
control: Effects of age and aerobic exercise training. J. Gerontol. Ser. A Biomed. Sci. Med. Sci. 2014, 69, 371–378. [CrossRef]
94. Thomas, A.C.; Brown, A.; Hatt, A.A.; Manta, K.; Costa-Parke, A.; Kamal, M.; Joanisse, S.; McGlory, C.; Phillips, S.M.; Kumbhare,
D.; et al. Short-term aerobic conditioning prior to resistance training augments muscle hypertrophy and satellite cell content in
healthy young men and women. FASEB J. 2022, 36, e22500. [CrossRef]

95. Eglseer, D.; Traxler, M.; Embacher, S.; Reiter, L.; Schoufour, J.D.; Weijs, P.J.; Voortman, T.; Boirie, Y.; Cruz-Jentoft, A.; Bauer,
S. Nutrition and exercise interventions to improve body composition for persons with overweight or obesity near retirement
age: A systematic review and network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Adv. Nutr. 2023, 14, 516–538. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Jeong, W.; Moon, J.Y.; Kim, J.-H. Association of absolute and relative hand grip strength with all-cause mortality among
middle-aged and old-aged people. BMC Geriatr. 2023, 23, 321. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

96.

97. Mey, R.; Calatayud, J.; Casaña, J.; Torres-Castro, R.; Cuenca-Martínez, F.; Suso-Martí, L.; Andersen, L.L.; López-Bueno, R.
Handgrip strength and respiratory disease mortality: Longitudinal analyses from SHARE. Pulmonology 2024, 30, 445–451.
[CrossRef]

98. Kazeminasab, F.; Baharlooie, M.; Karimi, B.; Mokhtari, K.; Rosenkranz, S.K.; Santos, H.O. Effects of intermittent fasting combined
with physical exercise on cardiometabolic outcomes: Systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical studies. Nutr. Rev. 2024,
82, 1726–1740. [CrossRef]

99. Wallis, G.A.; Gonzalez, J.T. Is exercise best served on an empty stomach? Proc. Nutr. Soc. 2019, 78, 110–117. [CrossRef]
100. Soraya, N.; Parwanto, E. The controversial relationship between body mass index and handgrip strength in the elderly: An

overview. Malays. J. Med. Sci. 2023, 30, 73. [CrossRef]

101. Palacio, A.C.; Díaz-Torrente, X.; Quintiliano-Scarpelli, D. Higher abdominal adiposity is associated with lower muscle strength in

Chilean adults. Front. Nutr. 2022, 9, 812928. [CrossRef]

102. Jeukendrup, A.E. Periodized nutrition for athletes. Sports Med. 2017, 47 (Suppl. 1), 51–63. [CrossRef]
103. Keenan, S.; Cooke, M.B.; Belski, R. The effects of intermittent fasting combined with resistance training on lean body mass:

A systematic review of human studies. Nutrients 2020, 12, 2349. [CrossRef]

104. Vieira, A.F.; Costa, R.R.; Macedo, R.C.O.; Coconcelli, L.; Kruel, L.F.M. Effects of aerobic exercise performed in fasted v. fed state on
fat and carbohydrate metabolism in adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Br. J. Nutr. 2016, 116, 1153–1164. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

105. Chen, Y.C.; Travers, R.L.; Walhin, J.P.; Gonzalez, J.T.; Koumanov, F.; Betts, J.A.; Thompson, D. Feeding influences adipose tissue

responses to exercise in overweight men. Am. J. Physiol.-Endocrinol. Metab. 2017, 313, E84–E93. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

106. Civitarese, A.E.; Hesselink, M.K.; Russell, A.P.; Ravussin, E.; Schrauwen, P. Glucose ingestion during exercise blunts exercise-
induced gene expression of skeletal muscle fat oxidative genes. Am. J. Physiol.-Endocrinol. Metab. 2005, 289, E1023–E1029.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

107. Van Proeyen, K.; Szlufcik, K.; Nielens, H.; Ramaekers, M.; Hespel, P. Beneficial metabolic adaptations due to endurance exercise

training in the fasted state. J. Appl. Physiol. 2011, 110, 236–245. [CrossRef]

108. Santos, H.O.; Macedo, R.C. Impact of intermittent fasting on the lipid profile: Assessment associated with diet and weight loss.

Clin. Nutr. ESPEN 2018, 24, 14–21. [CrossRef]

109. Liu, M.-Y.; Chen, S.-Q. Effects of low/medium-intensity exercise on fat metabolism after a 6-h fast. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public

Health 2022, 19, 15502. [CrossRef]

110. Meng, H.; Zhu, L.; Kord-Varkaneh, H.; Santos, H.O.; Tinsley, G.M.; Fu, P. Effects of intermittent fasting and energy-restricted diets

on lipid profile: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutrition 2020, 77, 110801. [CrossRef]

111. Kord, H.V.; Tinsley, G.M.; Santos, H.O.; Zand, H.; Nazary, A.; Fatahi, S.; Mokhtari, Z.; Salehi-Sahlabadi, A.; Tan, S.C.; Rahmani, J.;
et al. The influence of fasting and energy-restricted diets on leptin and adiponectin levels in humans: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Clin. Nutr. 2021, 40, 1811–1821. [CrossRef]

112. Kord-Varkaneh, H.; Salehi-Sahlabadi, A.; Tinsley, G.M.; Santos, H.O.; Hekmatdoost, A. Effects of time-restricted feeding (16/8)
combined with a low-sugar diet on the management of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: A randomized controlled trial. Nutrition
2023, 105, 111847. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nutrients 2025, 17, 1992

43 of 43

113. Saleh, S.A.; Santos, H.O.; Găman, M.A.; Cerqueira, H.S.; Zaher, E.A.; Alromaih, W.R.; Arafat, N.S.; Adi, A.R.; Adly, H.M.; Alyoubi,
R.; et al. Effects of intermittent fasting regimens on glycemic, hepatic, anthropometric, and clinical markers in patients with
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Clin. Nutr. ESPEN 2024,
59, 70–80. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

114. Kord Varkaneh, H.; Salehi sahlabadi, A.; Găman, M.A.; Rajabnia, M.; Sedanur Macit-Çelebi, M.; Santos, H.O.; Hekmatdoost, A.
Effects of the 5, 2 intermittent fasting diet on non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: A randomized controlled trial. Front. Nutr. 2022,
9, 948655. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

115. Santos, H.O. Intermittent fasting in the management of diabetes: A review of glycemic control and safety. Nutr. Rev. 2024,

82, 1437–1443. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
