---
pmid: 40646578
license: cc by
source: https://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/40646578
title: POPUP - an observational digital study reporting general population norms for the EQ-5D-5-L and HUI-3 in 8 countries.
---

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13690-025-01642-z

Archives of Public Health

POPUP: an observational digital study 
reporting general population norms for the 
EQ-5D-5-L and HUI-3 in 8 countries

Sarah Dewilde1*

, Nafthali Hananja Tollenaar1

, Glenn Phillips2

, Sandra Paci2 and Mathieu F. Janssen3

Abstract
Background  This study aimed to estimate population norms in the US, Canada, UK, Italy, Spain, Germany, The 
Netherlands, and Belgium for the EQ-5D-5-L with six bolt-on dimensions (vision, breathing, tiredness, sleep, social 
relationships, self-confidence), and for the Health Utilities Index-Mark 3 (HUI-3).

Methods  A digital study was conducted among 9,000 general population participants, representative of age, sex, 
education, and region within each country. Data collection included demographics, health conditions, EQ-5D-5-L and 
bolt-ons, and the HUI-3. National population norms were calculated for each dimension and for utility values. Testing 
for differences between subgroups was performed with a Generalized Linear Model.

Results  The proportion of respondents reporting severe-to-extreme problems at dimension level was highest on 
the EQ-5D-5-L dimensions pain/discomfort (5.5%) and anxiety/depression (5.6%), and on the HUI-3 dimensions pain 
(5.7%), emotion (5.4%), and cognition (4.1%). Severe-to-extreme problems on the EQ-5D-5-L bolt-on dimensions were 
social relationships (8.0%), sleep (7.6%), tiredness (7.4%), self-confidence (5.1%), vision (3.7%), and breathing (2.0%). 
Mean EQ-5D-5-L utility values for all countries combined displayed a U-shape by age and ranged between 0.819 and 
0.871, whereas HUI-3 utility values ranged between 0.717 and 0.768 without a clear pattern. The impact of age by sex 
on EQ-5D-5-L utility values was country-specific. HUI-3 utilities did not show a linear trend by age, and no difference 
was found by sex. Italy had the highest mean EQ-5D-5-L utility values, while the Netherlands and Spain had the 
highest values according to the HUI-3. The lowest utility values were observed in the UK, for both instruments. Utility 
values differed significantly by education, employment, place of residence, needing a caregiver, being on sick leave 
and having health conditions such as dementia, MS, depression, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus 
and heart failure.

Conclusions  Important differences in reporting problems and in utility values were found between countries and 
subgroups, highlighting the need for country-specific population norms.
Keywords  EQ-5D-5L, Health utility index, HUI-3, Health-related quality of life, HRQoL, Population norms, General 
population

*Correspondence:
Sarah Dewilde
sd@she-consulting.be
1Services in Health Economics (SHE), Boulevard Lambermont 418, 
Brussels 1030, Belgium

2argenx BV, Ghent, Belgium
3Section Medical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Department of 
Psychiatry, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

©  The  Author(s)  2025.  Open  Access    This  article  is  licensed  under  a  Creative  Commons  Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives  4.0 
International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you 
give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the 
licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or 
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or 
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit  h t t p  : / /  c r e a  t i  
v e c  o m m  o n s .  o r  g / l  i c e  n s e s  / b  y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 /.

RESEARCHOpen AccessPage 2 of 19

Text box 1: Contributions to the literature
• Population norms show how the general population rates their 
health-related quality of life, and generic instruments like the EQ-5D-5-L 
and HUI-3 have been used to measure it in patients and in the general 
population.
• Existing EQ-5D-5-L population norms are sometimes outdated or 
based on small samples. HUI-3 population norms exist only for the US 
and Canada.
• This study gathered data from 9,000 people across eight countries and 
found notable differences by country, age, and sex– highlighting the 
need for country-specific reference values.
• Population norms can help understanding the burden of health con-
ditions and evaluate treatment effectiveness.

Background
Health-related  quality  of  life  (HRQoL)  has  become  an 
increasingly important outcome in health care decision-
making,  especially  when  assessing  the  influence  that 
long-term  illness  or  chronic  conditions  may  have  on 
people’s lives and how treatments can impact HRQoL [1]. 
Multidimensionality  and  subjectivity  have  been  identi-
fied  as  two  fundamental  aspects  of  HRQoL. The  former 
pertains  to  the  comprehensive  nature  of  HRQoL,  which 
encompasses  various  dimensions  of  health  and  well-
being  (including  physical,  functional,  emotional,  and 
social  well-being)  associated  with  activities  of  daily  life 
such as work, leisure, household management, and inter-
personal relationships. The latter refers to the notion that 
HRQoL  is  best  measured  from  the  subject’s  perspective 
[2].

Many  generic  and  disease-specific  instruments  have 
been developed to measure HRQoL and are usually opti-
mized  to  capture  its  multidimensionality  aspects  [3]. 
Among  the  most  commonly  used  generic  instruments 
are the EQ-5D-5-L [4] and the HUI-3 [5], both intention-
ally  designed  to  be  brief  and  simple  HRQoL  measures 
covering  a  set  of  dimensions  that  are  arguably  the  most 
relevant to overall health. These instruments describe an 
individual’s health state and assign a corresponding util-
ity value reflecting their overall health status. Utility val-
ues are derived from population preferences for specific 
health states within a given country (i.e., country-specific 
value sets) and can be used to calculate quality-adjusted 
life years (QALYs) [6], the recommended health outcome 
for  economic  evaluations  of  healthcare  interventions  in 
many countries, including Canada, the United Kingdom 
(UK),  Italy,  Spain,  Germany,  the  Netherlands,  and  Bel-
gium, but not universally (e.g., not formally in the United 
States  [US]).  By  applying  country-specific  value  sets  to 
large,  representative  population  samples,  population 
norms  can  be  established,  i.e.,  benchmarks  that  reflect 
the average HRQoL in the general population [6].

Population norms can be used to compare the HRQoL 
of  specific  (patient)  populations  to  the  HRQoL  of 

members of the general population, enabling the quanti-
fication  of  disease  burden  in,  for  example,  rare  diseases 
[7].  Additionally,  they  facilitate  the  comparison  of  effi-
cacy outcomes in interventional trials [8]. EQ-5D popu-
lation  norms  have  been  published  for  many  countries 
[8–10],  but  data  is  at  times  outdated  or  based  on  the 
EQ-5D-3  L–  an  earlier  and  less  extended  version  of  the 
EQ-5D-5-L. Contrary to the EQ-5D-5-L, HUI-3 popula-
tion norms have only been published for the US [11] and 
Canada [12] and not for any European country.

Since  generic  HRQoL  measures  are  designed  to  be 
broadly applicable and complementary to condition-spe-
cific  measures,  they  may  lack  content  validity  and  thus 
be less sensitive in capturing the specific dimensions of a 
particular health condition [13]. Examples of dimensions 
known  to  significantly  impact  HRQoL  include  sensory 
impairments  (vision,  hearing,  smell,  taste)  [14],  specific 
aspects  of  physical  functioning  (breathing,  sleeping, 
fatigue/energy), mental health-related dimensions (emo-
tions,  self-confidence)  or  a  person’s  social  role  (social 
relationships)  [15].  So  far,  approximately  30  different  so 
called  “bolt-on”  dimensions  have  been  proposed  for  the 
adult EQ-5D instruments to improve their content valid-
ity  and  sensitivity  to  change  in  specific  populations  or 
contexts  [16].  However,  population  norms  are  also  lack-
ing for these bolt-on dimensions [17]. Knowledge of the 
distribution of bolt-on dimensions in the general popula-
tion can help researchers and policymakers identify and 
interpret QALY differences between interventions target-
ing  general  populations,  while  also  improving  the  sensi-
tivity of the EQ-5D in specific (patient) populations [13].

The objective of this study, referred to as the Population 
Norms  Study  (POPUP),  was  therefore  to  derive  popula-
tion  norms  for  both  the  EQ-5D-5-L  and  HUI-3  HRQoL 
measures  among  representative  samples  of  the  general 
population  from  eight  countries;  and  to  report  popula-
tion norms for extensions of the EQ-5D-5-L, namely for 
six  bolt-ons  covering  vision,  breathing,  tiredness,  sleep, 
self-confidence,  and  social  relationships.  These  bolt-
ons were selected for their relevance to general HRQoL, 
broad  applicability  across  populations,  and  their  poten-
tial to serve as baseline norms for comparing health out-
comes in populations with specific health conditions [18].

Methods
The  POPUP  study,  is  a  multinational  digital  survey 
designed to derive HRQoL norms from a general popu-
lation  sample  of  9,000  participants  across  eight  coun-
tries (Belgium, Canada, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, 
Spain,  the  United  Kingdom  [UK],  and  the  United  States 
[US])  [19].  Samples  sizes  were  not  based  on  formal  cal-
culation  but  driven  by  the  aim  of  representativity  for 
the  general  population.  However,  a  sample  size  of  1,000 
with  a  margin  error  (ME)  of  3.2%  (ME%  =  100  /  √N) 

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184 Page 3 of 19

was  considered  acceptable  for  a  survey  among  the  gen-
eral  population  [20].  A  larger  sample  of  2,000  was  col-
lected  in  the  US  to  account  for  its  substantially  larger 
and more diverse population, ensuring more reliable and 
representative  estimates  for  national-level  analyses.  In 
all  eight  countries,  samples  were  drawn  from  panels  of 
willing  survey  participants  using  stepped  random  sam-
pling  to  ensure  diversity  and  representation  across  key 
demographic  variables  (age,  sex,  education,  and  region) 
[21,  22].  The  sampling  process  was  carried  out  in  mul-
tiple  stages,  beginning  with  broad  panels,  and  progres-
sively narrowing down to smaller, selected groups based 
on  recruitment  progress.  This  multi-stage  approach 
helped ensure that individuals from various regions and 
socioeconomic  backgrounds  were  included.  After  the 
sampling,  propensity  weights  were  applied  to  adjust  the 
sample  to  better  reflect  the  general  population,  com-
pensating  for  any  imbalances  introduced  during  the 
multi-stage  sampling  process  [21,  22].  The  representa-
tive panels, operated by an international market research 
company  [23],  contain  a  large  number  of  participants, 
regularly  updated  with  new  entries  while  filtering  out 
individuals  flagged  for  survey  speeding  or  failing  trap 
questions and quality checks. Only panel members could 
participate  in  the  survey.  No  online  sampling  methods, 
such  as  river  sampling,  routing,  or  real-time  web  sam-
pling, were used. Respondents were recruited in the panel 
from  various  sources  (TV,  radio,  newspapers).  Potential 
participants  were  invited  via  e-mail  and  offered  points 
for completing the online survey [23], which could later 
be converted to a selection of gifts. The survey question-
naires were programmed and hosted on the LimeSurvey 
web portal by a research company with expertise in data 
collection [24]. To optimize the quality and efficiency, we 
ran  a  pilot  study  (of  which  the  data  were  not  analyzed) 
pre-testing  the  survey  with  10%  of  the  sample  in  each 
country. Additionally, we limited the responses from the 
entire possible range to the plausible range of responses 
for  several  questions.  We  cleaned  the  data  by  removing 
participants who rushed through the survey (< 300 s) and 
checked  for  validity  and  internal  consistency  to  ensure 
high data quality and completeness.

This  study  reported  population  norms  based  on  data 
collected  at  baseline  in  January-March  2021.  Demo-
graphic  characteristics  such  as  age,  sex,  level  of  educa-
tion,  country  of  residence,  living  situation,  employment 
situation,  and  presence  of  health  conditions  were  col-
lected,  in  addition  to  the  EQ-5D-5-L  plus  the  six 
bolt-ons,  and  the  HUI-3.  No  names  or  other  personal 
identifiers were recorded. Permissions were obtained for 
the use of the instruments from the EuroQol Group and 
from  Health  Utilities  Inc.  Ethical  approval  was  obtained 
in all eight countries. The study was authorized by Veritas 

IRB  in  Canada  (reference  number  2021-2434-5740-1), 
the  ethics  committee  at  Ghent  University  Hospital  in 
Belgium  (reference  number  BC-07857)  and  Salus  IRB 
reviewed  and  approved  the  other  countries  (reference 
number PN8450).

EQ-5D-5-L and bolt-ons

The  EQ-5D-5-L  consists  of  a  descriptive  system  assess-
ing  general  health  on  5  dimensions:  mobility  (MO), 
self-care  (SC),  usual  activities  (UA),  pain/discomfort 
(PD)  and  anxiety/depression  (AD).  Each  dimension  is 
described  in  1  to  5  severity  levels  ranging  from  “having 
no problems”, “having slight problems”, “having moderate 
problems”,  “having  severe  problems”  to  “having  extreme 
problems  /  being  unable”  to  perform  the  action  on  that 
dimension  on  the  day  of  completion  [4].  Responses  on 
the  five  core  dimensions  can  be  combined  into  a  utility 
value,  which  summarizes  overall  HRQoL.  This  value  is 
anchored  between  1  (representing  full  health),  0  (dead), 
with negative values indicating health states perceived to 
be  worse  than  death.  A  set  of  utility  values,  known  as  a 
country-specific tariff represents the general population’s 
preferences  for  a  given  health  state  as  described  by  the 
EQ-5D-5-L.  Furthermore,  the  visual  analogue  scale  (EQ 
VAS) is a thermometer-like vertical scale ranging from 0 
(worst imaginable health) to 100 (best imaginable health) 
on  which  respondents  rate  their  overall  health  on  the 
day  of  completion.  Country-specific  language  versions 
approved by the EuroQoL Group were used. Several pre-
viously  developed  and  published  bolt-ons  were  added 
to  the  standard  EQ-5D-5-L  dimensions  including  vision 
[25], breathing [26] sleep [27], tiredness [25], social rela-
tionships [28], and self-confidence [28] with the same five 
response  levels  as  the  main  EQ-5D  descriptive  system 
[18].

Health utilities index 3 (HUI-3)

The HUI-3 is a generic, preference-based, comprehensive 
system  for  measuring  the  current  health  status  of  par-
ticipants  and  their  HRQoL  [5]. The  HUI-3  classification 
system  distinguishes  eight  dimensions  of  health:  vision, 
hearing,  speech,  ambulation,  dexterity,  emotion,  cogni-
tion, and pain. Each level is described with 5 or 6 levels 
of ability/disability [5]. HUI-3 responses can also be sum-
marized  into  a  utility  value,  ranging  from  − 0.36  (worst 
heath state) to 1 (full health) with 0 as an anchor repre-
senting  dead.  The  HUI-3  utilities  have  good  correlation 
with EQ-5D utilities, but are not interchangeable [29].

Statistical analysis

Firstly,  demographics  characteristics  (age,  sex,  level  of 
education,  and  living  situation)  and  the  prevalence  of 
self-reported  health  conditions  were  summarized  for 

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184 l
a
n
o
i
t
a
N

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

P
U
P
O
P

l
a
n
o
i
t
a
N

P
U
P
O
P

l
a
n
o
i
t
a
N

P
U
P
O
P

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

l
a
n
o
i
t
a
N

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

P
U
P
O
P

l
a
n
o
i
t
a
N

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

S
U

K
U

n
i
a
p
S

s
d
n
a
l
r
e
h
t
e
N

P
U
P
O
P

y
l
a
t
I

l
a
n
o
i
t
a
N

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

y
n
a
m
r
e
G

P
U
P
O
P

a
d
a
n
a
C

i

m
u
g
e
B

l

l
a
n
o
i
t
a
N

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

P
U
P
O
P

l
a
n
o
i
t
a
N

P
U
P
O
P

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

f
o
n
o
i
t
r
o
p
o
r
P

s
r
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r

.

*
1
4
6
2
=
N

0
0
0
2
=
N

.

*
4
3
5
=
N

0
0
0
1
=
N

.

*
5
9
3
=
N

0
0
0
1
=
N

.

*
3
4
1
=
N

0
0
0
1
=
N

.

*
0
0
5
=
N

0
0
0
1
=
N

.

*
5
9
6
=
N

0
0
0
1
=
N

.

*
2
1
3
=
N

0
0
0
1
=
N

.

*
3
9
=
N

0
0
0
1
=
N

%
6
0
3

.

%
7
6
3

.

%
7
2
3

.

%
6
0
3

.

%
7
6
3

.

%
7
2
3

.

%
9
8
2

.

%
3
5
3

.

%
8
5
3

.

%
9
8
2

.

%
3
5
3

.

%
8
5
3

.

%
1
7
2

.

%
4
8
3

.

%
5
4
3

.

%
0
7
2

.

%
4
8
3

.

%
6
4
3

.

%
3
6
2

.

%
4
7
3

.

%
4
6
3

.

%
3
6
2

.

%
4
7
3

.

%
4
6
3

.

%
9
2
2

.

%
0
7
3

.

%
2
0
4

.

%
9
2
2

.

%
0
7
3

.

%
2
0
4

.

%
1
4
2

.

%
2
6
3

.

%
7
9
3

.

%
1
4
2

.

%
2
6
3

.

%
7
9
3

.

%
4
9
2

.

%
1
9
3

.

%
6
1
3

.

%
4
9
2

.

%
1
9
3

.

%
6
1
3

.

%
3
8
2

.

%
7
5
3

.

%
0
6
3

.

%
3
8
2

.

%
7
5
3

.

%
0
6
3

.

%
4
1
5

.

%
6
8
4

.

%
4
1
5

.

%
6
8
4

.

%
5
1
5

.

%
6
8
4

.

%
5
1
5

.

%
6
8
4

.

%
1
1
5

.

%
9
8
4

.

%
2
1
5

.

%
9
8
4

.

%
0
1
5

.

%
1
9
4

.

%
0
1
5

.

%
1
9
4

.

%
3
2
5

.

%
7
7
4

.

%
3
2
5

.

%
7
7
4

.

%
7
1
5

.

%
3
8
4

.

%
7
1
5

.

%
3
8
4

.

%
5
0
5

.

%
6
9
4

.

%
5
0
5

.

%
6
9
4

.

%
4
0
5

.

%
7
9
4

.

%
4
0
5

.

%
7
9
4

.

4
3
–
8
1

4
5
–
5
3

+
5
5

e
g
A

l

e
a
m
e
F

l

e
a
M

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
E

x
e
S

%
7
4
6

.

%
6
5
5

.

%
4
4

.

%
0
9
6

.

%
4
2
6

.

%
8
1

.

%
8
3
7

.

%
2
1
1

.

%
9
1
6

.

%
9
6
6

.

%
0
0
6

.

%
7
1

.

%
0
1
5

.

%
9
2
4

.

%
7
6

.

%
1
0
7

.

%
4
7
6

.

%
4
6

.

%
0
6
4

.

%
7
3
4

.

%
0
2

.

%
9
9
5

.

%
4
3

.

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
e
y
r
a
m

i
r
P

%
5
6
5

.

y
r
a
d
n
o
c
e
 S

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
e

%
3
5
3

.

%
9
9
3

.

%
0
1
3

.

%
8
5
3

.

%
2
6
2

.

%
0
7
2

.

%
1
3
3

.

%
3
8
3

.

%
0
9
4

.

%
4
0
5

.

%
9
9
2

.

%
3
6
2

.

%
0
4
5

.

%
3
4
5

.

%
1
0
4

.

%
1
0
4

.

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
e
r
e
h
g
H

i

%
4
2
6

.

%
4
8
5

.

%
4
9
7

.

%
0
1
9

.

%
1
8
6

.

%
9
2
7

.

%
6
2
6

.

%
2
6
7

.

n
o
i
t
a
u
t
i
s
g
n
i
v
i
L

l

p
e
h
t
u
o
h
t
i

w

e
m
o
h
t
 A

i

r
e
v
g
e
r
a
c

a
m
o
r
f

s
c
i
t
s
i
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
t
n
e
i
t
a
P

1
e
l
b
a
T

%
3
6

.

%
5
3

.

%
0
2

.

%
6
0
3

.

%
7
7
3

.

%
5
8
1

.

%
6
0

.

%
1
0

.

%
1
0

.

%
3
0

.

%
1
0

.

%
0
0

.

%
3
4

.

%
6
4

.

%
0
0

.

%
0
0

.

%
3
1

.

%
7
1

.

%
0
2

.

%
9
0

.

h
t
i

w
e
m
o
h
t
A

a
m
o
r
f

l

p
e
h

i

r
e
v
g
e
r
a
c

%
0
0
3

.

%
5
0

.

%
0
0

.

%
2
5
2

.

%
1
0

.

%
0
0

.

%
3
5
3

.

%
6
2
2

.

y

l
i

m
a
f
a
h
t
i

W

%
2
0

.

%
1
0

.

%
3
0

.

g
n
i
s
r
u
n
a
n

I

r
e
b
m
e
m

e
m
o
h

%
1
0

.

m
r
e
t
-
g
n
o

l

a
n

 I

n
o
i
t
a
t
i
l
i

b
a
h
e
 r

y
t
i
l
i

c
a
f

e
r
a
c

Page 4 of 19

1
S
e
b
a
T

l

,
l

a

i
r
e
t
a
M

l

l

a
t
n
e
m
e
p
p
u
S
e
n

i
l

n
O

e
h
t
n

i

l

e
b
a

l
i

a
v
a

s
i

l

e
p
m
a
s
P
U
P
O
P
e
h
t
n

i

s
n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c
h
t
l

a
e
h
f
o
e
c
n
e

l

a
v
e
r
p
e
h
T

.

l

d
o
b
n

i

d
e
t
h
g

i
l

i

h
g
h
e
r
a

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
n
d
n
a

s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
d
e
v
r
e
s
b
o
n
e
e
w

t
e
b
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
ff
D

i

.

l

e
p
o
e
p
f
o
s
n
o

i
l
l
i

m
n

i

r
e
b
m
u
n

;

l

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p
t
l
u
d
A
*

.

0
0
8

.

0
9
7

.

8
2
8

.

3
2
7

.

0
5
7

.

9
6
7

.

0
2
8

.

9
6
7

.

1
7
7

.

1
6
7

.

3
7
7

.

8
6
7

a
/
n

.

9
3
7

.

6
7
7

.

2
6
7

n
a
e
M

,

S
A
V
Q
E

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 19

each  country  using  descriptive  statistics,  and  compared 
to  national  data  if  available.  While  we  used  three  age 
groups  (18–34,  35–54,  55+)  to  align  our  sample  with 
national  statistics  for  the  purpose  of  propensity  weight-
ing,  we  stratified  utility  values  by  age  groups  with  nar-
rower categories (18–24, 25–34, 35–44 etc.) to present a 
more detailed insight on the evolution of HRQoL across 
different  life  stages.  Level  of  education  was  assessed 
using a single question with three standardized response 
options: primary, secondary, and higher education. These 
categories were applied consistently across all countries, 
without adjustment for differences in national education 
systems.

We estimated reference distributions across levels of 
ability and disability of each countries’ general popula-
tion,  by  calculating  the  proportion  of  responders  per 
level  on  each  dimension  of  the  EQ-5D-5-L  (including 
bolt-ons  and  EQ  VAS  scores)  and  HUI-3  instruments. 
Additionally,  EQ-5D-5-L  utility  values  were  calculated 
for  each  country  by  applying  country-specific  tariffs 
to  the  profile  data  [30–37].  Mean  utility  values  for  the 
entire  sample  were  generated  by  taking  an  arithmetic 
average  of  the  utility  values  for  each  country.  HUI-3 
utility values were calculated using the Canadian value 
set  for  all  countries,  the  only  available  value  set  [38]. 
Utility  values  and  EQ  VAS  scores  are  presented  using 
the mean, standard deviation (SD), and the inter-quar-
tile  range  (Q1-Q3).  Spearman’s  rank  correlation  was 
used  to  report  the  association  between  EQ-5D-5-L 
utility  values  and  EQ  VAS  scores.  A  moderate  cor-
relation  (r = 0.40–0.59)  [39]  is  expected,  as  EQ  VAS 
reflects  overall  self-rated  health  (subjectivity),  while 
utility  values  are  based  on  specific  health  dimensions 
(multidimensionality).

We used Generalized Linear Models (GLM) to model 
and  test  for  differences  in  utility  values  for  subgroups 
defined  by  age  groups,  sex,  and  country  (together  in 
one  multivariable  regression  model),  and  to  estimate 
the utility value of subgroups defined by place of resi-
dence, education level, employment, and the presence 
of  comorbidities  (in  univariable  regression  models). 
Given  that  EQ-5D-5-L  utility  values  often  exhibit 
bimodal  and  skewed  distributions,  we  tested  alterna-
tive  GLM  specifications  using  different  combinations 
of  conditional  distributions  (normal  and  gamma) 
and  link  functions  (identity  and  log).  Model  fit  was 
assessed  using  the  log-likelihood,  Akaike  Information 
Criterion  (AIC),  and  Bayesian  Information  Criterion 
(BIC). Based on these metrics, the GLM with a normal 
distribution  and  identity  link  function–  equivalent  to 
an  ordinary  least  squares  (OLS)  model–  provided  the 
best  fit  to  the  data  and  was  therefore  selected  as  the 
final  model.  We  used  SAS  version  9.4  to  perform  all 
statistical analyses.

Results
Study participants

A total of 9,000 members of the general population from 
the eight countries participated in the POPUP study, with 
1,000 respondents per country, except for the US, where 
there  was  2,000  respondents  to  account  for  its  large 
population  (Table  1).  A  large  proportion  of  individuals 
(35.3% in the UK to 39.1% in Germany) fell within the age 
range of 35 to 54 years. The composition of the national 
statistics, and hence our sample, demonstrated a sligwht 
preponderance  of  females  (50.4%  in  Belgium  to  52.3% 
in  Italy)  compared  to  males.  The  proportion  of  higher 
educated  respondents  ranged  from  26.3%  in  Germany 
to 54.3% in Canada. In all countries, the majority of par-
ticipants live at home without help from a caregiver (58.4 
in the UK to 91.0% in the Netherlands). EQ VAS scores 
show  that  the  general  population  in  POPUP  rated  their 
own health on average at 76.3 on a scale of 100, ranging 
from  72.3  in  the  UK  to  79.0  in  the  US.  Anxiety  (14.7%) 
and  depression  (11.5%)  were  the  most  observed  health 
conditions in our sample, followed by thyroid problems/
disorder  (9.7%),  diabetes  (9.2%),  and  respiratory  disease 
(8.8%) (See Online Supplemental Material, Table S1).

EQ-5D-5-L dimensions responses

Distribution  of  responses  for  all  EQ-5D-5-L  dimen-
sions  are  displayed  per  country  in  Table  2.  The  propor-
tion  of  participants  reporting  “no  problems”  on  all  five 
EQ-5D-5-L  dimensions,  was  32.7%  across  the  entire 
sample, highest in the US (40.0%), followed by the Neth-
erlands  (37.4%)  and  lowest  in  Germany  (26.2%)  and 
Canada  (26.6%).  Results  by  dimension  show  that  pain/
discomfort  and  anxiety/depression  were  the  dimensions 
most  frequently  associated  with  the  reporting  of  severe 
or  extreme  problems  (5.5%  and  5.6%  overall).  Severe  to 
extreme  problems  in  any  dimension  (level  4–5)  were 
most frequently observed in the UK (13.9%) and Canada 
(13.8%),  and  the  least  in  Italy  (6.6%).  Of  note,  respon-
dents from English-speaking countries indicated twice as 
often  that  they  had  extreme  problems  in  any  dimension 
compared to continental European countries. For exam-
ple,  about  3%  of  respondents  from  US,  UK  and  Canada 
reported to experience severe anxiety/depression, which 
is  about  three  times  higher  than  the  continental  Euro-
pean countries.

EQ-5D-5-L bolt-ons responses

Table  3  displays  the  distribution  of  respondents  across 
the levels of the EQ-5D-5-L bolt-ons. In POPUP, 3.7% of 
respondents  reported  having  severe-to-extreme  prob-
lems with vision (this was highest in Belgium, and lowest 
in  the  UK),  whereas  41.9%  had  no  problems  and  54.4% 
had  mild  to  moderate  problems.  Severe-to-extreme 
problems  with  breathing  were  reported  by  2.0%  of  the 

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184 Page 6 of 19

POPUP  sample,  with  the  highest  prevalence  observed 
in the US and the lowest in Spain and Italy. The majority 
(77.3%)  of  participants  reported  no  breathing  problems, 
and  20.7%  reported  mild  to  moderate  problems.  Over-
all,  7.6%  reported  severe-to-extreme  problems  on  the 
sleep  dimension  (this  was  the  highest  in  Germany  and 
the  lowest  in  Canada  and  Italy),  whereas  42.3%  had  no 
problems and 50.2% mild to moderate problems. Severe-
to-extreme  problems  with  tiredness  were  reported  by 
7.4%  of  the  POPUP  sample  (highest  in  Germany,  and 
four  times  lower  in  Italy).  Half  of  the  respondents  did 
not  experience  any  problems  with  tiredness  and  44.6% 
reported  mild  to  moderate  problems.  Two-thirds  of  the 
respondents  in  POPUP  did  not  have  any  problems  with 
self-confidence,  whereas  28.1%  had  mild  to  moderate 

problems and 5.1% severe-to-extreme problems (this was 
the lowest in Italy, and markedly higher in English-speak-
ing  countries  and  Germany).  Lastly,  severe-to-extreme 
problems  with  social  relationships  were  present  in  8.0% 
of the POPUP sample (this was the highest in the UK and 
the  lowest  in  Italy  and  the  Netherlands),  whereas  53.9% 
had no problems and 38.2% mild to moderate problems.

EQ-5D-5-L utility values

Mean EQ-5D utility values are presented by age and sex 
in Table 4, per country and for the combined sample. The 
distribution of utility values by country is shown in Figure 
S1.  The  highest  utility  values  were  found  in  Italy,  where 
especially men had much higher utilities (> 0.890), whilst 
the  lowest  utility  values  were  found  in  the  UK.  Notably 

Netherlands Spain

UK

US

All countries

N = 1000 N = 1000

92.3%
5.5%
1.7%
0.6%
0.0%

74.3%
16.7%
5.9%
2.5%
0.7%

90.7%
6.5%
2.1%
0.1%
0.5%

89.7%
6.1%
2.9%
0.5%
0.9%

93.3%
4.9%
1.1%
0.4%
0.3%

89.9%
7.3%
1.7%
0.6%
0.5%

75.3%
14.5%
6.1%
2.9%
1.2%

76.7%
14.8%
6.7%
1.6%
0.3%

80.0%
13.2%
4.7%
1.9%
0.2%

68.8%
17.4%
9.6%
4.2%
0.1%

Belgium Canada Germany Italy
N = 1000 N = 1000 N = 1000

Table 2  Distribution of the respondents across the 5 dimensions of the EQ-5D-5L
Dimensions
Sample size
Mobility
  No problems
  Mild problems
  Moderate problems
  Severe problems
  Extreme problems
Self-Care
  No problems
  Mild problems
  Moderate problems
  Severe problems
  Extreme problems
Usual Activities
  No problems
  Mild problems
  Moderate problems
  Severe problems
  Extreme problems
Pain / Discomfort
  No problems
  Mild problems
  Moderate problems
  Severe problems
  Extreme problems
Anxiety / Depression
  No problems
  Mild problems
  Moderate problems
  Severe problems
  Extreme problems
Profiles
  Number of different profiles
  % no problems in every dimension
  % severe or extreme in at least one
  dimension
  % negative utility values

47.9%
30.3%
14.2%
5.0%
2.7%

59.0%
25.2%
11.3%
3.3%
1.3%

58.0%
24.7%
10.8%
5.5%
1.1%

55.4%
29.4%
11.9%
2.6%
0.7%

77.4%
14.7%
5.4%
2.1%
0.4%

82.7%
12.1%
4.2%
0.6%
0.4%

72.5%
16.3%
8.3%
2.5%
0.4%

74.0%
18.1%
5.6%
1.6%
0.8%

36.0%
40.0%
17.4%
5.7%
1.0%

42.4%
35.4%
17.1%
4.7%
0.4%

43.6%
36.8%
14.7%
4.1%
0.9%

46.4%
37.7%
13.8%
2.0%
0.1%

184
26.6%
13.8%

160
30.7%
10.0%

147
30.6%
6.6%

174
26.2%
13.5%

67.3%
20.1%
8.4%
3.6%
0.7%

72.3%
16.4%
8.4%
2.2%
0.6%

52.5%
31.2%
11.0%
5.1%
0.2%

172
37.4%
10.8%

0.6%

0.5%

0.4%

0.5%

0.6%

N = 1000 N = 1000 N = 2000 N = 9000

82.5%
12.2%
3.8%
0.9%
0.7%

92.5%
5.6%
0.7%
0.8%
0.4%

83.1%
10.1%
5.1%
1.5%
0.2%

52.4%
32.3%
9.9%
4.5%
1.0%

53.3%
32.0%
10.1%
3.4%
1.2%

115
32.8%
9.7%

74.1%
15.4%
6.3%
3.6%
0.7%

86.8%
6.8%
5.0%
0.9%
0.5%

72.4%
15.9%
6.4%
3.7%
1.5%

49.4%
31.2%
12.6%
4.9%
1.9%

51.3%
25.8%
15.1%
4.8%
3.0%

174
30.3%
13.9%

75.7%
13.8%
6.7%
2.7%
1.2%

88.0%
6.6%
3.0%
1.7%
0.7%

77.4%
13.0%
6.4%
2.6%
0.6%

52.3%
27.8%
13.4%
4.4%
2.1%

62.5%
20.6%
11.0%
2.8%
3.1%

258
40.0%
11.8%

75.9%
14.6%
6.3%
2.6%
0.7%

90.1%
6.2%
2.4%
0.8%
0.5%

76.6%
14.4%
6.2%
2.2%
0.6%

47.5%
33.3%
13.7%
4.4%
1.1%

57.5%
25.4%
11.5%
3.8%
1.9%

592
32.7%
11.3%

0.5%

2.3%

2.0%

1.0%

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184 Page 7 of 19

low  utility  values  were  found  in  Canadian  and  British 
men over 75 years of age (0.629 and 0.654 respectively), 
strongly contrasting the utility values found in Canadian 
and  British  women  of  the  same  age  (0.775  and  0.781). 
The  GLM  models  revealed  that  age,  sex,  and  country 
have  a  statistically  significant  impact  on  utility  values 
(all p < 0.0001), and the impact of age by sex is country-
specific.  For  example,  the  sex  effect  was  only  consistent 
in  Belgium,  the  Netherlands,  and  Italy  (all  p < 0.0001) 
with  females  having  significantly  lower  utility  values 
than  males  (Online  Supplemental  Material  Table  S4). 
The  effect  of  sex  was  much  smaller  and  not  statistically 
significant  in  Canada,  Germany,  Spain,  and  in  most  age 
groups in the UK, with mean utility differences between 
males and females around 0.00-0.01. The effect of age was 

ambivalent:  utility  values  decreased  slightly  with  higher 
age but surged in some countries in people aged 65 years 
and  older  (Fig.  1). The  highest  utility  values  were  some-
times  observed  in  the  youngest  age  group  (this  was  the 
case  in  Belgium,  Spain,  US)  or  in  the  second  youngest 
(Germany),  but  also  sometimes  in  the  middle  (Canada, 
UK,  Italy)  or  the  highest  age  group  (Netherlands).  A 
regression  analysis  indicated  that  the  interaction  effect 
(effect  of  sex  separately  in  each  age  groups)  was  either 
non-existent or limited.

Other  factors  significantly  affecting  utility  values  were 
place of residence, education, employment, and suffering 
from  health  conditions  (all  p < 0.0001).  Participants  liv-
ing independently at home or with a family member had 
about  twice  the  utility  value  compared  to  participants 

Spain
N = 1000

Italy
N = 1000

Germany
N = 1000

Netherlands
N = 1000

78.7%
13.7%
5.9%
1.0%
0.8%

79.2%
15.4%
4.5%
0.9%
0.0%

78.2%
14.6%
5.4%
1.4%
0.4%

39.6%
36.7%
19.5%
3.7%
0.6%

46.2%
31.3%
18.6%
3.4%
0.6%

33.4%
39.1%
22.1%
5.3%
0.1%

44.7%
34.2%
16.7%
3.6%
0.8%

22.3%
40.5%
34.4%
2.9%
0.0%

73.2%
18.9%
6.1%
1.3%
0.6%

76.5%
16.5%
5.8%
0.9%
0.3%

Belgium Canada
N = 1000
N = 1000

Table 3  Distribution of the respondents across the 6 bolt-on questions to the EQ-5D-5L
Dimensions
Sample size
Vision
  No problems
  Mild problems
  Moderate problems
  Severe problems
  Extreme problems
Breathing
  No problems
  Mild problems
  Moderate problems
  Severe problems
  Extreme problems
Sleep
  No problems
  Mild problems
  Moderate problems
  Severe problems
  Extreme problems
Tiredness
  No problems
  Mild problems
  Moderate problems
  Severe problems
  Extreme problems
Self-confidence
  No problems
  Mild problems
  Moderate problems
  Severe problems
  Extreme problems
Social Relationships
  No problems
  Mild problems
  Moderate problems
  Severe problems
  Extreme problems

66.2%
21.6%
8.6%
2.9%
0.8%

63.3%
18.8%
11.7%
5.0%
1.3%

39.8%
37.8%
15.3%
5.5%
1.7%

42.5%
37.7%
13.6%
5.2%
1.0%

49.3%
31.1%
11.7%
6.4%
1.5%

36.6%
38.7%
18.5%
4.1%
2.1%

59.3%
25.2%
9.8%
4.6%
1.2%

48.4%
29.3%
14.6%
5.9%
1.9%

49.5%
27.1%
14.3%
5.8%
3.3%

61.9%
21.1%
11.2%
4.1%
1.7%

72.7%
17.3%
7.5%
2.2%
0.3%

72.7%
16.7%
7.3%
2.4%
0.9%

58.2%
24.3%
11.0%
4.6%
2.0%

30.7%
41.7%
18.4%
8.0%
1.3%

54.9%
31.5%
10.9%
2.3%
0.3%

53.9%
28.7%
12.4%
4.0%
1.1%

43.7%
32.3%
16.8%
5.4%
1.8%

41.9%
31.3%
15.2%
8.9%
2.6%

45.9%
31.5%
15.5%
6.0%
1.1%

51.3%
27.2%
14.0%
5.5%
1.9%

26.2%
45.1%
25.9%
2.4%
0.5%

78.0%
16.1%
5.1%
0.5%
0.2%

44.5%
38.2%
10.5%
5.4%
1.4%

47.6%
30.7%
17.3%
3.9%
0.5%

70.6%
16.1%
8.9%
3.5%
0.9%

53.4%
25.5%
12.8%
6.0%
2.3%

UK
N = 1000

US
N = 2000

All countries
N = 9000

54.5%
29.8%
13.3%
2.2%
0.2%

76.7%
16.8%
5.1%
1.3%
0.0%

35.1%
36.2%
20.6%
5.0%
3.2%

39.8%
32.3%
19.7%
5.5%
2.7%

61.2%
22.1%
10.5%
4.1%
2.0%

39.7%
32.3%
17.1%
7.3%
3.6%

55.1%
28.3%
13.1%
2.5%
1.0%

77.8%
13.7%
4.6%
2.2%
1.8%

50.9%
27.6%
13.2%
4.9%
3.4%

52.5%
24.8%
12.7%
5.9%
4.2%

68.3%
15.6%
9.7%
3.3%
3.2%

60.7%
21.7%
9.4%
4.2%
4.0%

41.9%
34.8%
19.6%
3.2%
0.5%

77.3%
15.5%
5.2%
1.3%
0.7%

42.3%
35.2%
15.0%
5.5%
2.1%

48.1%
29.8%
14.8%
5.3%
2.1%

66.8%
18.7%
9.4%
3.5%
1.6%

53.9%
25.7%
12.5%
5.3%
2.7%

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184 Page 8 of 19

who lived at home but needed help from a caregiver, or 
who  were  living  in  a  long-term  care  rehabilitation  facil-
ity / in a nursing home (See Online Supplemental Mate-
rial Table S2). Higher education was also associated with 
higher utility values and being in employment or study-
ing lead to higher utility values than being unemployed, 
at  home,  or  retired.  Sick  leave  was  also  strongly  associ-
ated  with  lower  utility  values  (-0.300).  All  health  condi-
tions,  except  cancer  (-0.181),  were  strongly  associated 
with decreased utility values compared to those without 
health  conditions,  but  this  was  especially  observed  in 
patients with dementia (-0.494), hemiplegia (-0.469), sys-
temic lupus erythematosus (-0.455), congestive heart fail-
ure  (-0.336),  multiple  sclerosis  (-0.312),  lupus  nephritis 
(-0.309),  psoriatic  arthritis  (-0.300),  depression  (-0.296), 
peptic ulcer disease (-0.281), and liver disease (-0.270).

EQ VAS scores

The  EQ  VAS  results  are  presented  in  Table  4,  and  the 
mean  scores  are  compared  to  published  national  sta-
tistics  in  Table  1.  The  distribution  of  EQ  VAS  scores  by 
country  is  shown  in  Figure  S1.  For  most  countries,  the 
mean EQ VAS score in the POPUP study was similar to 
that reported in national statistics, with an overall mean 
EQ VAS score of 76.3. The Netherlands and the UK were 
exceptions: in these two countries, the POPUP EQ VAS 
scores  were  comparable  to  those  in  the  other  countries 
but considerably lower than their respective national sta-
tistics.  Figure  2  shows  the  relationship  between  age  and 
the EQ VAS score, which displays a fluctuating curve with 
peaks  around  40  and  70  years  of  age,  and  dips  around 
30  and  60  years. The  averaged  EQ  VAS  across  all  coun-
tries  declined  between  ages  18–45,  and  slightly  increase 
between 45 and 75. VAS scores were similar between the 
sexes  (75  female,  76  males)  and  that  was  true  for  most 
age groups. Correlations between EQ VAS and country-
specific utility values were generally moderate, averaging 
around 0.56– with some variation, including a lower cor-
relation in the US (0.39) and a higher value in Germany 
(0.73).  When  stratified  by  age  groups,  correlations  were 
lower  among  individuals  aged  18–44  (around  0.45)  and 
higher  among  those  aged  45–75  (around  0.65),  suggest-
ing that younger adults may value aspects of HRQoL not 
fully  captured  by  the  EQ-5D-5-L  dimensions.  A  similar 
pattern was observed by sex, with a lower correlation in 
males (0.49) compared to females (0.63).

HUI-3 dimension responses

Distribution  of  responses  for  all  HUI-3  dimensions  is 
presented  in  Table  5.  The  proportion  of  participants 
reporting  “no  problems”  on  all  eight  HUI-3  dimensions 
followed  the  same  patterns  as  for  the  EQ-5D  and  was 
highest  in  the  US  (18.7%)  and  the  Netherlands  (13.0%), 
and lowest in Belgium (7.5%) and Germany (8.9%). Across 

all countries, reporting severe problems or being “unable 
to” perform an action in any HUI-3 dimension (last two 
levels) was most frequently observed in the dimension of 
pain  (5.7%),  followed  by  emotion  (5.4%),  and  cognition 
(4.1%),  whereas  extreme  problems  or  being  “unable  to” 
perform an action in a dimension was the least reported 
with  dexterity  (0.7%),  followed  by  ambulation  (1.2%). 
Severe problems or being “unable to” perform an action 
in any HUI-3 dimension were most frequently observed 
in the UK (18.1%), Canada (14.9%) and Germany (14.9%), 
and the least in the Netherlands (10.8%) and Italy (11.4%), 
which is comparable to the EQ-5D findings.

Ocular  problems  of  any  severity  were  most  frequently 
reported in the Belgian population (70.4%) and least fre-
quently  in  the  US  (61.2%).  However,  the  percentage  of 
people  who  could  not  see  at  all  was  highest  in  the  US 
(1.2%),  and  is  relatively  high  compared  to  Belgium,  the 
Netherlands  and  Spain  (< 0.4%).  Problems  with  hearing 
were  most  prevalent  in  the  US  (15.9%,),  approximately 
three times as much as in Germany and Spain, and twice 
the rate measured in Italy. In addition, 3.4% of the Ameri-
can sample could not hear at all, whilst this was only up 
to  2.5%  of  the  population  in  the  other  countries.  Prob-
lems with speech were also most frequently observed in 
the  US  (13.8%),  while  this  was  on  average  6.6%  in  other 
research  countries.  Approximately  one-fifth  of  partici-
pants in the UK (21.1%), US (22.0%) and Canada (18.6%) 
reported  ambulation  problems  of  any  severity,  which  is 
almost twice as much as in Spain (11%) and Italy (12.6%). 
Approximately  90%  of  participants  had  no  dexterity 
problems, although this percentage was slightly higher in 
Italy and Spain, and the lowest in the US.

HUI-3 utility values

Mean  HUI-3  utility  values  for  all  countries  combined 
ranged  from  0.717  in  participants  between  25  and  34 
years of age to 0.767 and 0.768 in participants aged 35–44 
and 65–74 years, respectively (Table  6). Overall, highest 
utility  values  were  observed  in  the  Netherlands  (0.779), 
closely followed by Italy (0.778), and were lowest in the in 
the UK (0.706).

HUI-3  utility  values  did  not  show  a  specific  trend  by 
age  but  were  rather  fluctuating  (Fig.  3).  This  variability 
was  observed  in  all  countries  and  in  the  total  sample. 
Overall,  no  large  differences  were  found  between  males 
and  females  (0.753  vs.  0.740),  however  the  effect  of  sex 
varied  across  age  groups  and  countries.  Statistical  infer-
ence confirmed that age, sex, and country each had a sta-
tistically  significant  impact  independent  of  each  other, 
and  that  the  impact  of  age  and  sex  differed  by  country. 
However, across the board, whilst statistically significant, 
the impact of sex was small.

Several other factors influenced HUI-3 utility values, as 
evidenced by the heterogeneous values across subgroups 

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184 35–44

18–24

25–34

Belgium
Sample size N = 1000
Female

Table 4  Population norms for the EQ-5D-5L utilities using country-specific value sets, and EQ VAS
UK
N = 1000
Mean, SD
(Q1; Q3)
0.696, 0.285
(0.584; 0.879)
0.788, 0.306
(0.750; 1)
0.823, 0.216
(0.768; 1)
0.784, 0.211
(0.740; 1)
0.737, 0.281
(0.654; 0.879)
0.797, 0.252
(0.735; 1)
0.781, 0.178
(0.708; 0.768)
0.771, 0.255
(0.708; 1)

Netherlands Spain
N = 1000
Mean, SD
(Q1; Q3)
0.796, 0.266
(0.742; 1)
0.830, 0.23
3 (0.731; 1)
0.802, 0.230
(0.705; 1)
0.807, 0.211
(0.773; 0.918)
0.783, 0.215
(0.727; 0.887)
0.828, 0.217
(0.791; 1)
0.815, 0.194
(0.765; 0.887)
0.812, 0.222
(0.743; 1)

Canada
N = 1000
Mean, SD
(Q1; Q3)
0.817, 0.172
(0.713; 0.922)
0.851, 0.141
(0.794; 1)
0.867, 0.147
(0.818; 1)
0.820, 0.221
(0.750; 1)
0.793, 0.180
(0.671; 0.922)
0.812, 0.176
(0.719; 1)
0.775, 0.161
(0.652; 0.899)
0.827, 0.178
(0.757; 0.956)

Italy
N = 1000
Mean, SD
(Q1; Q3)
0.880, 0.096
(0.844; 0.956)
0.906, 0.080
(0.859; 1)
0.929, 0.127
(0.909; 1)
0.891, 0.234
(0.902; 1)
0.821, 0.190
(0.795; 0.953)
0.861, 0.160
(0.817; 0.953)
0.804, 0.303
(0.793; 0.953)
0.874, 0.164
(0.844; 0.956)

Mean, SD
(Q1; Q3)
0.853, 0.105
(0.771; 0.919)
0.833, 0.166
(0.755; 1)
0.867, 0.177
(0.838; 1)
0.781, 0.255
(0.711; 0.922)
0.837, 0.149
(0.794; 1)
0.847, 0.107
(0.794; 0.922)
0.821, 0.133
(0.757; 0.922)
0.832, 0.167
(0.771; 0.922)

Germany
N = 1000
Mean, SD
(Q1; Q3)
0.868, 0.193
(0.887; 0.970)
0.911, 0.083
(0.882; 0.907)
0.883, 0.170
(0.882; 1)
0.805, 0.205
(0.813; 1)
0.837, 0.296
(0.783; 0.943)
0.860, 0.276
(0.861; 0.970)
.

N = 1000
Mean, SD
(Q1; Q3)
0.895, 0.075
(0.841; 1)
0.888, 0.089
(0.841; 1)
0.885, 0.150
(0.797; 1)
0.822, 0.242
(0.757; 0.922)
0.852, 0.324
(0.818; 0.922)
0.919, 0.000
(0.919; 0.919)
.

0.862, 0.196
(0.825; 0.97)

0.860, 0.178
(0.818; 1)

45–54

55–64

65–74

75+

All

Male
18–24

25–34

35–44

45–54

55–64

65–74

75+

All

All
18–24

25–34

35–44

45–54

55–64

65–74

75+

All

0.947, 0.127
(0.922; 1)
0.894, 0.195
(0.797; 1)
0.872, 0.133
(0.841; 1)
0.858, 0.185
(0.818; 1)
0.884, 0.088
(0.838; 0.922)
0.859, 0.133
(0.823; 0.922)
0.849, 0.144
(0.794; 1)
0.875, 0.153
(0.823; 1)

0.890, 0.121
(0.794; 1)
0.866, 0.181
(0.771; 1)
0.869, 0.158
(0.841; 1)
0.825, 0.219
(0.757; 1)
0.857, 0.128
(0.815; 1)
0.853, 0.121
(0.797; 0.922)
0.835, 0.139
(0.794; 0.922)
0.853, 0.162
(0.794; 1)

0.811, 0.220
(0.663; 1)
0.837, 0.215
(0.785; 1)
0.853, 0.130
(0.771; 1)
0.824, 0.179
(0.713; 1)
0.825, 0.184
(0.794; 1)
0.823, 0.148
(0.757; 0.922)
0.629, 0.354
(0.333; 0.922)
0.827, 0.184
(0.756; 1)

0.814, 0.192
(0.713; 0.956)
0.844, 0.177
(0.794; 1)
0.860, 0.139
(0.794; 1)
0.822, 0.200
(0.730; 1)
0.807, 0.182
(0.751; 0.922)
0.818, 0.162
(0.756; 0.922)
0.694, 0.303
(0.606; 0.899)
0.827, 0.181
(0.756; 1)

0.912, 0.080
(0.877; 1)
0.925, 0.076
(0.877; 1)
0.877, 0.161
(0.861; 1)
0.857, 0.170
(0.835; 0.970)
0.800, 0.321
(0.733; 0.943)
0.854, 0.257
(0.867; 1)
.

0.860, 0.183
(0.835; 1)

0.890, 0.143
(0.877; 1)
0.918, 0.079
(0.882; 1)
0.880, 0.164
(0.877; 1)
0.853, 0.188
(0.829; 0.97)
0.820, 0.311
(0.783; 0.943)
0.857, 0.262
(0.861; 0.970)
.

0.861, 0.189
(0.831; 1)

0.887, 0.119
(0.844; 0.956)
0.892, 0.124
(0.859; 1)
0.942, 0.080
(0.909; 1)
0.931, 0.082
(0.903; 1)
0.931, 0.054
(0.902; 1)
0.899, 0.099
(0.858; 1)
0.896, 0.135
(0.861; 1)
0.915, 0.096
(0.891; 1)

0.883, 0.104
(0.844; 0.956)
0.898, 0.103
(0.859; 1)
0.936, 0.101
(0.909; 1)
0.910, 0.162
(0.902; 1)
0.865, 0.134
(0.844; 0.956)
0.879, 0.124
(0.844; 0.956)
0.847, 0.193
(0.804; 0.956)
0.893, 0.131
(0.858; 1)

0.879, 0.214
(0.883; 1)
0.860, 0.229
(0.791; 1)
0.905, 0.167
(0.883; 1)
0.867, 0.167
(0.817; 1)
0.861, 0.142
(0.817; 1)
0.852, 0.137
(0.808; 1)
0.905, 0.088
(0.848; 1)
0.871, 0.163
(0.817; 1)

0.837, 0.250
(0.778; 1)
0.845, 0.231
(0.778; 1)
0.851, 0.209
(0.782; 1)
0.838, 0.192
(0.782; 1)
0.810, 0.188
(0.743; 1)
0.840, 0.177
(0.804; 1)
0.866, 0.139
(0.787; 1)
0.841, 0.196
(0.782; 1)

0.909, 0.090
(0.872; 1)
0.890, 0.099
(0.841; 1)
0.887, 0.135
(0.841; 1)
0.849, 0.182
(0.794; 1)
0.847, 0.262
(0.818; 1)
0.884, 0.138
(0.798; 1)
.

0.870, 0.165
(0.838; 1)

0.901, 0.081
(0.841; 1)
0.889, 0.095
(0.841; 1)
0.886, 0.140
(0.841; 1)
0.835, 0.208
(0.794; 1)
0.850, 0.282
(0.818; 1)
0.893, 0.129
(0.838; 1)
.

0.865, 0.171
(0.835; 1)

0.851, 0.234
(0.729; 1)
0.767, 0.349
(0.717; 1)
0.788, 0.218
(0.750; 1)
0.792, 0.203
(0.698; 1)
0.754, 0.242
(0.664; 1)
0.777, 0.178
(0.735; 0.879)
0.654, 0.180
(0.395; 0.721)
0.782, 0.236
(0.703; 1)

0.778, 0.279
(0.635; 1)
0.778, 0.323
(0.750; 1)
0.804, 0.217
(0.768; 1)
0.787, 0.207
(0.703; 1)
0.745, 0.258
(0.654; 1)
0.789, 0.214
(0.735; 1)
0.731, 0.185
(0.683; 0.735)
0.776, 0.245
(0.708; 1)

Page 9 of 19

US
N = 2000
Mean, SD
(Q1; Q3)
0.918, 0.261
(0.875; 1)
0.796, 0.645
(0.678; 1)
0.870, 0.243
(0.817; 1)
0.843, 0.248
(0.777; 1)
0.815, 0.173
(0.721; 1)
0.844, 0.152
(0.776; 1)
0.928, 0.049
(0.844; 1)
0.840, 0.250
(0.779; 1)

0.929, 0.265
(0.940; 1)
0.835, 0.444
(0.810; 1)
0.717, 0.363
(0.630; 1)
0.886, 0.168
(0.844; 1)
0.807, 0.191
(0.738; 1)
0.876, 0.100
(0.817; 1)
0.870, 0.076
(0.806; 0.94)
0.828, 0.265
(0.776; 1)

0.923, 0.260
(0.883; 1)
0.816, 0.524
(0.743; 1)
0.780, 0.341
(0.701; 1)
0.860, 0.213
(0.777; 1)
0.812, 0.181
(0.738; 1)
0.860, 0.125
(0.806; 1)
0.894, 0.070
(0.844; 1)
0.834, 0.259
(0.777; 1)

All countries
N = 9000
Mean, SD
(Q1; Q3)
0.852, 0.175
(0.797; 1)
0.835, 0.243
(0.782; 1)
0.867, 0.191
(0.837; 1)
0.827, 0.230
(0.768; 1)
0.815, 0.214
(0.751; 0.943)
0.839, 0.174
(0.780; 0.956)
0.817, 0.180
(0.756; 0.953)
0.835, 0.209
(0.778; 1)

0.891, 0.158
(0.844; 1)
0.857, 0.235
(0.794; 1)
0.827, 0.246
(0.791; 1)
0.859, 0.172
(0.796; 1)
0.824, 0.207
(0.771; 1)
0.860, 0.128
(0.806; 1)
0.852, 0.161
(0.817; 1)
0.850, 0.197
(0.794; 1)

0.871, 0.170
(0.817; 1)
0.846, 0.239
(0.794; 1)
0.846, 0.227
(0.811; 1)
0.843, 0.202
(0.776; 1)
0.819, 0.210
(0.766; 1)
0.849, 0.150
(0.794; 1)
0.836, 0.168
(0.785; 1)
0.843, 0.203
(0.791; 1)

EQ VAS
Mean
SD
Q1
Q3

76.2
15.6
70
88

73.9
17.7
66
87

76.8
18.5
70
90

76.1
15.9
70
90

76.9
16.1
70
90

76.9
16.4
70
90

72.3
19.1
61
88

79.0
18.1
70
91

76.3
17.4
70
90

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184 Page 10 of 19

Fig. 1  Plot of the mean EQ-5D-5L utility per country, by age category

Fig. 2  Plot of EQ VAS scores per age category, by country

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184  
 
s
e
i
r
t
n
u
o
c
l
l

A

S
U

K
U

n
i
a
p
S

s
d
n
a
l
r
e
h
t
e
N

y
l
a
t
I

y
n
a
m
r
e
G

a
d
a
n
a
C

i

m
u
g
e
B

l

0
0
0
9
=
N

0
0
0
2
=
N

0
0
0
1
=
N

0
0
0
1
=
N

0
0
0
1
=
N

0
0
0
1
=
N

0
0
0
1
=
N

0
0
0
1
=
N

0
0
0
1
=
N

3
-
I

U
H
e
h
t

f

i

o
s
n
a
m
o
d
8
e
h
t

s
s
o
r
c
a
s
t
n
e
d
n
o
p
s
e
r
e
h
t

f

o
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
D

5
e
l
b
a
T

l

e
z
i
s
e
p
m
a
S

s
n
i
a
m
o
D

n
o
i
s
i
V

%
4
4
3

.

%
8
8
3

.

%
2
6
3

.

%
5
2
3

.

%
5
3
3

.

%
6
2
3

.

%
5
2
3

.

%
3
5
3

.

%
6
9
2

.

r
e
h
t
o
e
h
t
n
o
d
n
e
i
r
f
a
e
z
i
n
g
o
c
e
r
d
n
a
t
n
i
r
p
s
w
e
n
y
r
a
n
d
r
o
d
a
e
r
o
t
h
g
u
o
n
e

i

l
l

e
w
e
e
s
o
t
e
b
A

l

%
7
0
6

.

%
6
5
5

.

%
4
9
5

.

%
2
3
6

.

%
7
3
6

.

%
6
2
6

.

%
8
0
6

.

%
8
8
5

.

%
3
6
6

.

r
e
h
t
o
e
h
t
n
o
d
n
e
i
r
f
a
e
z
i
n
g
o
c
e
r
d
n
a
t
n
i
r
p
s
w
e
n
y
r
a
n
d
r
o
d
a
e
r
o
t
h
g
u
o
n
e

i

l
l

e
w
e
e
s
o
t
e
b
A

l

.

s
e
s
n
e

l

t
c
a
t
n
o
c
r
o
s
e
s
s
a
g
t
u
o
h
t
i

l

w

,
t
e
e
r
t
s
e
h
t

f

o
e
d
i
s

.

s
e
s
s
a
g
h
t
i

l

w

t
u
b

,
t
e
e
r
t
s
e
h
t

f

o
e
d
i
s

%
5
1

.

%
9
1

.

%
5
1

.

%
0
1

.

%
5
1

.

%
3
1

.

%
8
1

.

%
2
1

.

%
3
1

.

l

d
n
e
i
r
f
a
e
z
i
n
g
o
c
e
r
o
t
e
b
a
n
u
t
u
b
s
e
s
s
a
g
t
u
o
h
t
i

l

w

r
o
h
t
i

w

i

t
n
i
r
p
s
w
e
n
y
r
a
n
d
r
o
d
a
e
r
o
t
e
b
A

l

%
6
1

.

%
6
1

.

%
5
1

.

%
3
2

.

%
8
0

.

%
3
1

.

%
7
1

.

%
3
2

.

%
6
1

.

t
u
b
s
e
s
s
a
g
t
u
o
h
t
i

l

w

r
o
h
t
i

w

t
e
e
r
t
s
e
h
t

f

o
e
d
i
s

r
e
h
t
o
e
h
t
n
o
d
n
e
i
r
f
a
e
z
i
n
g
o
c
e
r
o
t
e
b
A

l

.

s
e
s
s
a
g
h
t
i

l

w
n
e
v
e

,
t
e
e
r
t
s
e
h
t

f

o
e
d
i
s

r
e
h
t
o
e
h
t
n
o

.

s
e
s
s
a
g
h
t
i

l

w
n
e
v
e

i

,
t
n
i
r
p
s
w
e
n
y
r
a
n
d
r
o
d
a
e
r
o
t
e
b
a
n
u

l

%
7
0

.

%
2
1

.

%
8
0

.

%
3
0

.

%
1
0

.

%
9
0

.

%
7
0

.

%
6
0

.

%
2
0

.

%
2
1

.

%
0
1

.

%
6
0

.

%
7
0

.

%
5
0

.

%
3
1

.

%
4
2

.

%
9
1

.

%
9
0

.

f

o
e
d
i
s

l

r
e
h
t
o
e
h
t
n
o
d
n
e
i
r
f
a
e
z
i
n
g
o
c
e
r
o
t
e
b
a
n
u
d
n
a
t
n
i
r
p
s
w
e
n
y
r
a
n
d
r
o
d
a
e
r
o
t
e
b
a
n
U

l

i

.

s
e
s
s
a
g
h
t
i

l

w
n
e
v
e

,
t
e
e
r
t
s
e
h
t

.
l
l

a
t
a
e
e
s
o
t
e
b
a
n
U

l

%
0
0
9

.

%
1
4
8

.

%
8
8
8

.

%
6
4
9

.

%
2
0
9

.

%
2
2
9

.

%
1
4
9

.

%
6
0
9

.

%
2
1
9

.

t
u
o
h
t
i

w

,

l

e
p
o
e
p
r
e
h
t
o
e
e
r
h
t

t
s
a
e

l

t
a
h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
a
s
r
e
v
n
o
c
p
u
o
r
g
a
n

i

i

d
a
s

s
i

t
a
h
w

r
a
e
h
o
t
e
b
A

l

g
n
i
r
a
e
H

%
4
1

.

%
8
2

.

%
5
1

.

%
1
1

.

%
2
1

.

%
7
0

.

%
2
0

.

%
1
1

.

%
2
1

.

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
m
o
o
r

i

t
e
u
q
a
n

i

n
o
s
r
e
p
r
e
h
t
o
e
n
o
h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
a
s
r
e
v
n
o
c
a
n

i

i

d
a
s

s
i

t
a
h
w

r
a
e
h
o
t
e
b
A

l

.

i

d
a
g
n
i
r
a
e
h
a

%
8
3

.

%
1
6

.

%
8
3

.

%
4
1

.

%
8
4

.

%
0
3

.

%
7
1

.

%
0
4

.

%
9
2

.

a
h
t
i

w
m
o
o
r

i

t
e
u
q
a
n

i

n
o
s
r
e
p
r
e
h
t
o
e
n
o
h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
a
s
r
e
v
n
o
c
a
n

i

i

d
a
s

s
i

t
a
h
w

r
a
e
h
o
t
e
b
A

l

r
e
h
t
o
e
e
r
h
t

t
s
a
e

l

t
a
h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
a
s
r
e
v
n
o
c
p
u
o
r
g
a
n

i

i

d
a
s

s
i

t
a
h
w

l

r
a
e
h
o
t
e
b
a
d
n
a
d
a
g
n
i
r
a
e
h

i

.

l

e
p
o
e
p
r
e
h
t
o
e
e
r
h
t

t
s
a
e

l

.

i

d
a
g
n
i
r
a
e
h
a
h
t
i

l

w
e
p
o
e
p

%
8
1

.

%
2
2

.

%
8
2

.

%
4
1

.

%
8
1

.

%
3
1

.

%
2
1

.

%
3
1

.

%
5
2

.

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
m
o
o
r

i

t
e
u
q
a
n

i

n
o
s
r
e
p
r
e
h
t
o
e
n
o
h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
a
s
r
e
v
n
o
c
a
n

i

i

d
a
s

s
i

t
a
h
w

r
a
e
h
o
t
e
b
A

l

r
e
h
t
o
e
e
r
h
t

t
s
a
e

l

t
a
h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
a
s
r
e
v
n
o
c
p
u
o
r
g
a
n

i

i

d
a
s

s
i

t
a
h
w

l

r
a
e
h
o
t
e
b
a
n
u
t
u
b

,

i

d
a
g
n
i
r
a
e
h
a

%
8
0

.

%
4
1

.

%
6
0

.

%
3
0

.

%
2
1

.

%
5
0

.

%
3
0

.

%
5
0

.

%
0
1

.

a
h
t
i

w
m
o
o
r

i

t
e
u
q
a
n

i

n
o
s
r
e
p
r
e
h
t
o
e
n
o
h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
a
s
r
e
v
n
o
c
a
n

i

i

d
a
s

s
i

t
a
h
w

r
a
e
h
o
t
e
b
A

l

.

i

d
a
g
n
i
r
a
e
h
a
h
t
i

w
n
e
v
e
e
p
o
e
p

l

t
a
h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
a
s
r
e
v
n
o
c
p
u
o
r
g
a
n

i

i

d
a
s

s
i

t
a
h
w

i

r
a
e
h
o
t
d
a
g
n
i
r
a
e
h
a
s
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

t
u
b

,

i

d
a
g
n
i
r
a
e
h
a

r
e
h
t
o
e
e
r
h
t

t
s
a
e

l

t
a
h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
a
s
r
e
v
n
o
c
p
u
o
r
g
a
n

i

i

d
a
s

s
i

t
a
h
w

l

r
a
e
h
o
t
e
b
a
n
u
t
u
b

,

i

d
a
g
n
i
r
a
e
h

.

i

d
a
g
n
i
r
a
e
h
a
h
t
i

w
n
e
v
e
e
p
o
e
p

l

Page 11 of 19

%
2
2

.

%
4
3

.

%
5
2

.

%
3
1

.

%
9
0

.

%
4
2

.

%
4
2

.

%
6
2

.

%
1
1

.

%
8
1
9

.

%
9
2

.

%
2
6
8

.

%
2
4

.

%
8
2
9

.

%
6
2

.

%
8
3
9

.

%
0
3

.

%
2
3
9

.

%
6
2

.

%
1
4
9

.

%
6
1

.

%
7
3
9

.

%
8
2

.

%
5
2
9

.

%
0
2

.

%
9
3
9

.

%
9
2

.

l

d
o
o
t
s
r
e
d
n
u
e
b
o
t
e
b
a
t
u
b
s
r
e
g
n
a
r
t
s
h
t
i

i

w
g
n
k
a
e
p
s
n
e
h
w
y

l
l

a
i
t
r
a
p
d
o
o
t
s
r
e
d
n
u
e
b
o
t
e
b
A

l

.

s
d
n
e
i
r
f

r
o
s
r
e
g
n
a
r
t
s
h
t
i

i

l

l

w
g
n
k
a
e
p
s
n
e
h
w
y
e
t
e
p
m
o
c
d
o
o
t
s
r
e
d
n
u
e
b
o
t
e
b
A

l

.
l
l

a
t
a
r
a
e
h
o
t
e
b
a
n
U

l

h
c
e
e
p
S

%
5
3

.

%
3
6

.

%
0
3

.

%
0
2

.

%
1
3

.

%
2
3

.

%
2
2

.

%
2
3

.

%
6
2

.

l

e
m
w
o
n
k
o
h
w
e
p
o
e
p
r
o
s
r
e
g
n
a
r
t
s
h
t
i

i

w
g
n
k
a
e
p
s
n
e
h
w
y

l
l

a
i
t
r
a
p
d
o
o
t
s
r
e
d
n
u
e
b
o
t
e
b
A

l

.
l
l

e
w

%
7
0

.

%
8
1

.

%
3
0

.

%
9
0

.

%
6
0

.

%
1
0

.

%
4
0

.

%
5
0

.

%
4
0

.

l

d
o
o
t
s
r
e
d
n
u
e
b
o
t
e
b
a
t
u
b
s
r
e
g
n
a
r
t
s
h
t
i

i

w
g
n
k
a
e
p
s
n
e
h
w
d
o
o
t
s
r
e
d
n
u
e
b
o
t
e
b
a
n
U

l

.
l
l

e
w
e
m
w
o
n
k
o
h
w
e
p
o
e
p
y
b
y

l

l
l

a
i
t
r
a
p

.
l
l

e
w
e
m
w
o
n
k
o
h
w
e
p
o
e
p
h
t
i

l

i

w
g
n
k
a
e
p
s
n
e
h
w
y
e
t
e
p
m
o
c

l

l

%
0
1

.

%
7
1

.

%
3
1

.

%
3
0

.

%
5
0

.

%
0
1

.

%
8
0

.

%
8
1

.

%
2
0

.

.
)
l
l

a
t
a
k
a
e
p
s
o
t
e
b
a
n
u
r
o

l

i

l

(
e
p
o
e
p
r
e
h
t
o
o
t
g
n
k
a
e
p
s
n
e
h
w
d
o
o
t
s
r
e
d
n
u
e
b
o
t
e
b
a
n
U

l

n
o
i
t
a
l
u
b
m
A

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
s
e
i
r
t
n
u
o
c
l
l

A

%
8
2
8

.

%
9
0
1

.

%
0
8
7

.

%
3
3
1

.

S
U

%
9
8
7

.

%
3
1
1

.

%
0
9
8

.

%
5
8

.

%
9
3
8

.

%
0
9

.

%
5
7
8

.

%
9
7

.

%
7
2
8

.

%
1
2
1

.

%
4
1
8

.

%
2
2
1

.

%
8
5
8

.

%
4
0
1

.

K
U

n
i
a
p
S

s
d
n
a
l
r
e
h
t
e
N

y
l
a
t
I

y
n
a
m
r
e
G

a
d
a
n
a
C

i

m
u
g
e
B

l

i

.
t
n
e
m
p
u
q
e
g
n
k
l
a
w

i

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
d
n
a

,

i

y
t
l
u
c
ffi
d
t
u
o
h
t
i

i

g
n
k
l
a
w
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

t
o
n
s
e
o
d
t
u
b

,

y
t
l
u
c
ffi
d
h
t
i

i

i

w
d
o
o
h
r
o
b
h
g
e
n
e
h
t
d
n
u
o
r
a
k
l
a
w
o
t
e
b
A

l

i

w
d
o
o
h
r
o
b
h
g
e
n
e
h
t
d
n
u
o
r
a
k
l
a
w
o
t
e
b
A

l

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

5
e
l
b
a
T

s
n
i
a
m
o
D

%
5
3

.

%
0
5

.

%
0
4

.

%
2
1

.

%
5
4

.

%
9
2

.

%
6
3

.

%
2
3

.

%
9
1

.

f

l

o
p
e
h
e
h
t

t
u
o
h
t
i

w

t
u
b

i

,
t
n
e
m
p
u
q
e
g
n
k
l
a
w
h
t
i

i

i

w
d
o
o
h
r
o
b
h
g
e
n
e
h
t
d
n
u
o
r
a
k
l
a
w
o
t
e
b
A

l

.

n
o
s
r
e
p
r
e
h
t
o
n
a

%
7
1

.

%
7
2

.

%
6
3

.

%
3
0

.

%
3
1

.

%
4
0

.

%
0
1

.

%
9
1

.

%
1
1

.

o
t

l

r
i
a
h
c
e
e
h
w
a
s
e
r
i
u
q
e
r
d
n
a

i

,
t
n
e
m
p
u
q
e
g
n
k
l
a
w
h
t
i

i

w
s
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d
t
r
o
h
s
y
n
o
k
l
a
w
o
t
e
b
A

l

l

.

i

d
o
o
h
r
o
b
h
g
e
n
e
h
t
d
n
u
o
r
a
t
e
g

.

n
o
s
r
e
p
r
e
h
t
o
n
a
f

l

o
p
e
h
e
h
t

r
o
t
n
e
m
p
u
q
e

i

%
7
0

.

%
7
0

.

%
4
1

.

%
8
0

.

%
5
0

.

%
2
1

.

%
2
0

.

%
6
0

.

%
5
0

.

e
h
t
h
t
i

w
s
e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d
t
r
o
h
s

k
l
a
w
o
t
e
b
A

l

i

.
t
n
e
m
p
u
q
e
g
n
k
l
a
w
h
t
i

i

w
n
e
v
e

,

l

e
n
o
a
k
l
a
w
o
t
e
b
a
n
U

l

%
5
0

.

%
3
0

.

%
8
0

.

%
2
0

.

%
8
0

.

%
2
0

.

%
6
0

.

%
7
0

.

%
3
0

.

%
6
8
8

.

%
7
6

.

%
4
4
8

.

%
6
7

.

%
6
8
8

.

%
9
6

.

%
3
2
9

.

%
7
4

.

%
8
9
8

.

%
3
6

.

%
5
1
9

.

%
6
5

.

%
8
8
8

.

%
5
6

.

%
2
8
8

.

%
7
7

.

%
2
9
8

.

%
1
7

.

i

.
t
n
e
m
p
u
q
e
g
n
k
l
a
w

i

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
d
n
a

,

i

y
t
l
u
c
ffi
d
t
u
o
h
t
i

i

w
d
o
o
h
r
o
b
h
g
e
n
e
h
t
d
n
u
o
r
a
k
l
a
w
o
t
e
b
A

l

.

s
r
e
g
n
fi
n
e
t
d
n
a
s
d
n
a
h
o
w

t

f

o
e
s
u

l
l

u
F

y
t
i
r
e
t
x
e
D

.

i

d
o
o
h
r
o
b
h
g
e
n
e
h
t
d
n
u
o
r
a
t
e
g
o
t

l

r
i
a
h
c
e
e
h
w
a
s
e
r
i
u
q
e
r
d
n
a

,

n
o
s
r
e
p
r
e
h
t
o
n
a
f

o
p
e
h

l

f

l

o
p
e
h
r
o
s
l
o
o
t

l

i

a
c
e
p
s
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

t
o
n
s
e
o
d
t
u
b

,

s
r
e
g
n
fi
r
o
s
d
n
a
h

f

o
e
s
u
e
h
t
n

i

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
i

m
L

i

.

n
o
s
r
e
p
r
e
h
t
o
n
a

%
4
2

.

%
4
4

.

%
9
1

.

%
3
1

.

%
9
1

.

%
6
1

.

%
6
2

.

%
2
2

.

%
5
1

.

s
e
o
d

(

s
l
o
o
t

l

i

a
c
e
p
s

f

o
e
s
u
h
t
i

w

t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n

i

s
i

,

s
r
e
g
n
fi
r
o
s
d
n
a
h

f

o
e
s
u
e
h
t
n

i

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
i

m
L

i

.
)

n
o
s
r
e
p
r
e
h
t
o
n
a
f

l

o
p
e
h
e
h
t
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

t
o
n

%
7
1

.

%
7
2

.

%
3
1

.

%
2
1

.

%
4
1

.

%
2
1

.

%
6
1

.

%
4
1

.

%
8
1

.

e
m
o
s

r
o

f

n
o
s
r
e
p
r
e
h
t
o
n
a
f

l

o
p
e
h
e
h
t

s
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

,

s
r
e
g
n
fi
r
o
s
d
n
a
h

f

o
e
s
u
e
h
t
n

i

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
i

m
L

i

.
)
s
l
o
o
t

l

i

a
c
e
p
s

f

o
e
s
u
e
h
t
h
t
i

w
n
e
v
e
t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n

i

t
o
n

(

s
k
s
a
t

%
4
0

.

%
5
0

.

%
8
0

.

%
2
0

.

%
5
0

.

%
1
0

.

%
3
0

.

%
2
0

.

%
4
0

.

t
s
o
m

r
o

f

n
o
s
r
e
p
r
e
h
t
o
n
a
f

l

o
p
e
h
e
h
t

s
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

,

s
r
e
g
n
fi
r
o
s
d
n
a
h

f

o
e
s
u
e
h
t
n

i

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
i

m
L

i

.
)
s
l
o
o
t

l

i

a
c
e
p
s

f

o
e
s
u
e
h
t
h
t
i

w
n
e
v
e
t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n

i

t
o
n

(

s
k
s
a
t

%
3
0

.

%
5
0

.

%
6
0

.

%
3
0

.

%
1
0

.

%
1
0

.

%
3
0

.

%
4
0

.

%
1
0

.

s
k
s
a
t

l
l

a
r
o

f

n
o
s
r
e
p
r
e
h
t
o
n
a
f

l

o
p
e
h
e
h
t

s
e
r
i
u
q
e
r

,

s
r
e
g
n
fi
r
o
s
d
n
a
h

f

o
e
s
u
e
h
t
n

i

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
i

m
L

i

Page 12 of 19

%
2
1
4

.

%
1
9
3

.

%
4
4
1

.

%
7
3

.

%
7
1

.

%
2
3
7

.

%
3
5

.

%
2
9

.

%
3
8

.

%
2
3

.

%
8
0

.

%
0
8
5

.

%
3
6
2

.

%
5
0
1

.

%
8
3

.

%
5
1

.

%
4
2
7

.

%
3
3

.

%
3
0
1

.

%
5
7

.

%
6
4

.

%
9
1

.

%
8
1
3

.

%
1
3
4

.

%
2
7
1

.

%
5
4

.

%
4
3

.

%
3
7
6

.

%
1
5

.

%
5
3
1

.

%
1
9

.

%
3
4

.

%
6
0

.

%
9
1
3

.

%
8
5
4

.

%
6
5
1

.

%
3
5

.

%
5
1

.

%
8
0
7

.

%
2
6

.

%
9
0
1

.

%
4
8

.

%
4
3

.

%
4
0

.

%
2
2
5

.

%
8
1
3

.

%
3
3
1

.

%
7
1

.

%
1
1

.

%
4
7
7

.

%
0
8

.

%
4
3

.

%
0
8

.

%
2
2

.

%
1
1

.

%
4
8
2

.

%
7
0
5

.

%
2
7
1

.

%
7
2

.

%
0
1

.

%
5
1
8

.

%
1
5

.

%
3
6

.

%
8
5

.

%
1
1

.

%
3
0

.

%
2
3
3

.

%
9
6
4

.

%
2
4
1

.

%
2
4

.

%
5
1

.

%
3
3
7

.

%
5
4

.

%
1
0
1

.

%
4
9

.

%
5
2

.

%
2
0

.

%
5
9
3

.

%
4
6
3

.

%
7
7
1

.

%
9
3

.

%
5
2

.

%
6
3
7

.

%
4
4

.

%
6
8

.

%
0
9

.

%
0
4

.

%
4
0

.

%
7
7
3

.

%
9
4
4

.

%
1
3
1

.

%
2
3

.

%
2
1

.

%
2
0
7

.

%
3
7

.

%
6
9

.

%
7
9

.

%
4
2

.

%
7
0

.

.

s

%
0
5
4

.

%
1
0
5

.

%
9
5
4

.

%
9
2
4

.

%
9
1
5

.

%
5
7
4

.

%
8
4
3

.

%
9
3
4

.

%
5
7
3

.

i

i

l

e
v
o
s
d
n
a
k
n
h
t
o
t
g
n
y
r
t
n
e
h
w
y
t
l
u
c
ffi
d
e
l
t
t
i
l

i

a
e
v
a
h
t
u
b

.

s

l

m
e
b
o
r
p
y
a
d
o
t
y
a
d
e
v
o
s
d
n
a
y
l
r
a
e
c
k
n
h
t

l

l

i

,

s
g
n
h
t

i

,

s
g
n
h
t

i

t
s
o
m

r
e
b
m
e
m
e
r
o
t
e
b
A

l

t
s
o
m

r
e
b
m
e
m
e
r
o
t
e
b
A

l

n
o
i
t
i
n
g
o
C

.
)
s
l
o
o
t

l

i

a
c
e
p
s

f

o
e
s
u
e
h
t
h
t
i

w
n
e
v
e
t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n

i

t
o
n

(

.

e

l
i

h
w
h
t
r
o
w

t
o
n
s
i

e
f
i
l

t
a
h
t
y
p
p
a
h
n
u
o
S

.

e
f
i
l

n

i

d
e
t
s
e
r
e
t
n

i

d
n
a
y
p
p
a
H

n
o
i
t
o
m
E

.

y
p
p
a
h
n
u
t
a
h
w
e
m
o
S

.

y
p
p
a
h
t
a
h
w
e
m
o
S

.

y
p
p
a
h
n
u
y
r
e
V

.

s

l

l

m
e
b
o
r
p
y
a
d
o
t
y
a
d
e
v
o
s
d
n
a
y
l
r
a
e
c
k
n
h
t
o
t
e
b
a
t
u
b

l

l

i

.

s

l

m
e
b
o
r
p
y
a
d
o
t
y
a
d

,
l

u
f
t
e
g
r
o

f

t
a
h
w
e
m
o
S

y
a
d
o
t
y
a
d
e
v
o
s

l

i

i

r
o
k
n
h
t
o
t
g
n
y
r
t
n
e
h
w
y
t
l
u
c
ffi
d
e
l
t
t
i
l

i

a
e
v
a
h
d
n
a

,
l

u
f
t
e
g
r
o

f

t
a
h
w
e
m
o
S

.

s

l

m
e
b
o
r
p

l

m
e
b
o
r
p
y
a
d
o
t
y
a
d
e
v
o
s

l

i

i

r
o
k
n
h
t
o
t
g
n
y
r
t
n
e
h
w
y
t
l
u
c
ffi
d
t
a
e
r
g
e
v
a
h
d
n
a

i

,
l

u
f
t
e
g
r
o

f
y
r
e
V

.

s

l

m
e
b
o
r
p
y
a
d
o
t
y
a
d
e
v
o
s

l

i

r
o
k
n
h
t
o
t
e
b
a
n
u
d
n
a

l

,
l
l

i

a
t
a
g
n
h
t
y
n
a
r
e
b
m
e
m
e
r
o
t
e
b
a
n
U

l

f

.
t
r
o
m
o
c
s
i
d
d
n
a
n
a
p

i

f

o
e
e
r
F

n
i
a
P

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 19

(Online  Supplemental  Material  Table  S3).  HUI-3  utility 
values  were  significantly  and  markedly  lower  for  people 
with  primary  (-0.111)  or  secondary  education  (-0.055) 
compared  to  those  who  had  a  higher  degree;  for  people 
who are unemployed (-0.082), cannot work due to illness 
(-0.357) or homemakers (-0.051) compared to those who 
are actively working; for those who live at home but need 
help from a caregiver (-0.492) or live in a nursing home 
(-0.654)  or  in  a  long-term  rehabilitation  facility  (-0.281) 
compared to the people who live at home independently; 
for those who were on sick leave during the past 4 weeks 
(-0.260);  for  those  who  need  regular  help  from  a  care-
giver (-0.429) compared to the people who don’t need a 
caregiver;  and  for  those  suffering  from  selected  health 
conditions.  The  ten  health  conditions  with  the  largest 
HUI-3  utility  decrement  were  dementia  (-0.749),  hemi-
plegia  (-0.705),  systemic  lupus  erythematosus  (-0.583), 
lupus nephritis (-0.500), congestive heart failure (-0.402), 
depression  (-0.392),  psoriatic  arthritis  (-0.382),  HIV 
(-0.381),  multiple  sclerosis  (-0.341),  and  Crohn’s  disease 
(-0.336) (all p < 0.0001).

Discussion
Main results

This  study  presents  EQ-5D-5-L  and  HUI-3  population 
norms for Belgium, Canada, Germany, Italy, the Nether-
lands, Spain, the UK, and the US. HRQoL data of 9,000 
members of the general population across eight countries 
were  collected  with  the  aim  of  establishing  an  HRQoL 
baseline which can be used as reference for comparison 
across  different  (patient)  populations.  Important  differ-
ences in EQ-5D-5-L utilities, EQ VAS scores, and HUI-3 
utilities,  were  found  between  countries  and  subgroups 
defined  by  age  and  sex,  highlighting  the  need  for  coun-
try-specific population norms.

The effect of sex differed by country and was in many 
countries smaller than the commonly accepted minimally 
important  difference  (MID);  even  though  differences 
were statistically significant due to the large sample size. 
The  MID  for  the  EQ-5D-5-L  has  been  heterogeneously 
reported, ranging from 0.040 (US) to 0.082 (UK) [40], or 
from 0.037 (Canada and England) to 0.058 (China) [41]. 
The  MID  for  the  HUI-3  has  been  estimated  to  be  0.03, 
although some studies consider a difference of 0.01 to be 
important  [42].  Differences  between  males  and  females 
were often smaller (0.00-0.01) except in Belgium and the 
Netherlands.  The  effect  of  age  on  utility  values  was  not 
consistent  across  instruments  and  countries.  In  some 
cases,  age-related  trends  diverged  considerably  between 
EQ-5D-5-L, EQ VAS, and HUI-3 scores highlighting that 
they may capture different aspects of HRQoL. Although 
differences  in  utility  values  by  age  were  statistically  sig-
nificant,  they  were  often  small.  Hence,  interpreting 

s
e
i
r
t
n
u
o
c
l
l

A

%
2
8
3

.

%
1
1
1

.

%
1
4

.

%
7
1

.

%
8
1
1

.

%
3
4
1

.

%
6
3

.

%
1
4
3

.

%
0
0
1

.

S
U

%
4
4

.

%
3
1

.

%
7
8
1

.

%
8
6
1

.

%
6
5

.

%
1
4
3

.

%
8
0
1

.

%
8
4

.

%
4
4

.

%
1
8
1

.

%
7
9

.

%
6
4

.

%
4
2
4

.

%
1
8

.

%
4
4

.

%
3
2

.

%
2
3
1

.

%
1
9

.

%
1
3

.

%
9
9
2

.

%
2
3
1

.

%
2
4

.

%
8
0

.

%
0
3
1

.

%
8
0
1

.

%
5
2

.

%
0
2
4

.

%
9
7

.

%
9
1

.

%
7
0

.

%
4
1
1

.

%
5
9

.

%
1
2

.

%
2
5
4

.

%
0
3
1

.

%
0
5

.

%
0
2

.

%
9
4
1

.

%
9
8

.

%
7
2

.

%
4
9
3

.

%
8
2
1

.

%
5
2

.

%
5
1

.

%
3
1
1

.

%
9
4
1

.

%
1
4

.

%
6
2
4

.

%
2
4
1

.

%
9
4

.

%
8
0

.

%
7
1
1

.

%
5
7

.

%
4
2

.

K
U

n
i
a
p
S

s
d
n
a
l
r
e
h
t
e
N

y
l
a
t
I

y
n
a
m
r
e
G

a
d
a
n
a
C

i

m
u
g
e
B

l

.

s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
e
m
o
s

i

s
t
n
e
v
e
r
p
t
a
h
t
n
a
p
e
r
e
v
e
s
o
t
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

.

s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
t
s
o
m

s
t
n
e
v
e
r
p
t
a
h
t
n
a
p
e
r
e
v
e
S

i

l
l
a
r
e
v
O

i

n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
y
r
e
v
e
n

i

s

l

m
e
b
o
r
p
o
n
%

.

s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
w
e
f
a
s
t
n
e
v
e
r
p
t
a
h
t
n
a
p
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
M

i

.

s
e
i
t
i
v
i
t
c
a
o
n
s
t
n
e
v
e
r
p
t
a
h
t
n
a
p
e
t
a
r
e
d
o
m
o
t
d

i

l
i

M

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

5
e
l
b
a
T

s
n
i
a
m
o
D

i

n
o
i
s
n
e
m
d
e
n
o
t
s
a
e

l

t
a
n

l

i
”
o
t
e
b
a
n
u
“
r
o
s

l

m
e
b
o
r
p
e
r
e
v
e
s
%

l

s
e
u
a
v
y
t
i
l
i
t
u
e
v
i
t
a
g
e
n
%

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 19

Table 6  Population norms for the HUI-3 utilities, using the Canadian value set

Sample 
size
Female

18–24

25–34

35–44

45–54

55–64

65–74

75+

All

Male
18–24

25–34

35–44

45–54

55–64

65–74

75+

All

All
18–24

25–34

35–44

45–54

55–64

65–74

75+

All

Belgium
N = 1000

Canada
N = 1000

Germany
N = 1000

Italy
N = 1000

Netherlands Spain
N = 1000

N = 1000

UK
N = 1000

US
N = 2000

All countries
N = 9000

Mean, SD  
(Q1; Q3)
0.780, 0.160 
(0.69; 0.91)
0.699, 0.327 
(0.63; 0.93)
0.802, 0.234 
(0.73; 0.93)
0.689, 0.287 
(0.54; 0.91)
0.783, 0.176 
(0.72; 0.92)
0.745, 0.185 
(0.66; 0.91)
0.683, 0.244 
(0.56; 0.91)
0.739, 0.243 
(0.65; 0.92)

0.872, 0.381 
(0.88; 1.00)
0.743, 0.378 
(0.58; 0.97)
0.793, 0.227 
(0.68; 0.97)
0.747, 0.263 
(0.67; 0.92)
0.806, 0.152 
(0.71; 0.92)
0.779, 0.173 
(0.70; 0.92)
0.764, 0.188 
(0.71; 0.92)
0.770, 0.242 
(0.69; 0.93)

0.815, 0.230 
(0.73; 0.97)
0.722, 0.347 
(0.62; 0.93)
0.799, 0.230 
(0.73; 0.95)
0.722, 0.274 
(0.60; 0.92)
0.793, 0.166 
(0.72; 0.92)
0.763, 0.179 
(0.67; 0.92)
0.725, 0.217 
(0.59; 0.92)
0.754, 0.243 
(0.67; 0.92)

Mean, SD 
(Q1; Q3)
0.732, 0.316 
(0.58; 0.93)
0.757, 0.251 
(0.64; 0.95)
0.797, 0.261 
(0.77; 0.97)
0.712, 0.300 
(0.66; 0.93)
0.739, 0.217 
(0.60; 0.92)
0.731, 0.226 
(0.66; 0.92)
0.704, 0.141 
(0.62; 0.82)
0.745, 0.259 
(0.65; 0.93)

0.632, 0.431 
(0.47; 0.93)
0.700, 0.378 
(0.56; 0.97)
0.784, 0.215 
(0.67; 0.93)
0.710, 0.290 
(0.57; 0.95)
0.790, 0.209 
(0.77; 0.95)
0.744, 0.230 
(0.55; 0.97)
0.590, 0.381 
(0.41; 0.85)
0.727, 0.286 
(0.60; 0.95)

0.682, 0.369 
(0.48; 0.93)
0.728, 0.314 
(0.60; 0.97)
0.791, 0.239 
(0.70; 0.95)
0.711, 0.294 
(0.62; 0.95)
0.762, 0.214 
(0.67; 0.92)
0.738, 0.227 
(0.62; 0.93)
0.641, 0.317 
(0.55; 0.85)
0.736, 0.272 
(0.62; 0.95)

Mean, SD  
(Q1; Q3)
0.774, 0.193 
(0.68; 0.92)
0.790, 0.175 
(0.73; 0.93)
0.758, 0.234 
(0.68; 0.92)
0.763, 0.246 
(0.68; 0.93)
0.696, 0.472 
(0.57; 0.91)
0.693, 0.475 
(0.55; 0.91)
.

0.739, 0.281 
(0.64; 0.91)

0.762, 0.217 
(0.73; 0.93)
0.776, 0.195 
(0.69; 0.97)
0.761, 0.253 
(0.68; 0.97)
0.753, 0.231 
(0.69; 0.92)
0.702, 0.340 
(0.58; 0.91)
0.781, 0.243 
(0.68; 0.92)
.

0.746, 0.248 
(0.66; 0.93)

0.768, 0.206 
(0.69; 0.93)
0.783, 0.186 
(0.70; 0.95)
0.760, 0.245 
(0.68; 0.93)
0.759, 0.238 
(0.68; 0.92)
0.699, 0.401 
(0.57; 0.91)
0.732, 0.366 
(0.65; 0.92)
.

0.742, 0.263 
(0.66; 0.92)

Mean, SD  
(Q1; Q3)
0.730, 0.209 
(0.66; 0.93)
0.780, 0.149 
(0.68; 0.93)
0.841, 0.181 
(0.78; 0.95)
0.784, 0.234 
(0.73; 0.91)
0.716, 0.222 
(0.64; 0.85)
0.790, 0.199 
(0.73; 0.91)
0.709, 0.413 
(0.63; 0.91)
0.771, 0.211 
(0.72; 0.92)

0.741, 0.300 
(0.66; 0.93)
0.670, 0.315 
(0.45; 0.93)
0.795, 0.223 
(0.75; 0.97)
0.833, 0.172 
(0.77; 0.97)
0.865, 0.083 
(0.84; 0.97)
0.792, 0.148 
(0.73; 0.92)
0.750, 0.168 
(0.68; 0.91)
0.786, 0.202 
(0.75; 0.93)

0.735, 0.241 
(0.66; 0.93)
0.719, 0.247 
(0.62; 0.93)
0.816, 0.208 
(0.76; 0.95)
0.807, 0.200 
(0.75; 0.93)
0.775, 0.165 
(0.73; 0.92)
0.791, 0.167 
(0.73; 0.91)
0.728, 0.249 
(0.68; 0.91)
0.778, 0.206 
(0.73; 0.93)

Mean, SD 
(Q1; Q3)
0.743, 0.298 
(0.64; 0.97)
0.799, 0.272 
(0.76; 0.95)
0.730, 0.301 
(0.57; 0.97)
0.747, 0.275 
(0.64; 0.95)
0.767, 0.212 
(0.70; 0.92)
0.756, 0.226 
(0.62; 0.92)
0.739, 0.232 
(0.59; 0.92)
0.756, 0.260 
(0.64; 0.95)

0.853, 0.338 
(0.85; 0.97)
0.759, 0.415 
(0.68; 1.00)
0.836, 0.246 
(0.79; 1.00)
0.804, 0.269 
(0.75; 0.97)
0.822, 0.154 
(0.77; 0.97)
0.790, 0.170 
(0.67; 0.97)
0.812, 0.160 
(0.65; 0.97)
0.803, 0.253 
(0.74; 0.97)

0.797, 0.319 
(0.74; 0.97)
0.778, 0.345 
(0.70; 0.97)
0.780, 0.281 
(0.67; 1.00)
0.776, 0.273 
(0.67; 0.97)
0.786, 0.189 
(0.70; 0.92)
0.772, 0.197 
(0.65; 0.95)
0.780, 0.189 
(0.64; 0.97)
0.779, 0.257 
(0.68; 0.97)

Mean, SD 
(Q1; Q3)
0.798, 0.139 
(0.69; 0.92)
0.753, 0.175 
(0.66; 0.92)
0.731, 0.343 
(0.55; 0.93)
0.700, 0.362 
(0.58; 0.93)
0.761, 0.502 
(0.73; 0.91)
0.821, 0.067 
(0.79; 0.84)
.

0.749, 0.291 
(0.68; 0.92)

0.803, 0.206 
(0.78; 0.95)
0.775, 0.191 
(0.71; 0.93)
0.824, 0.189 
(0.75; 0.97)
0.769, 0.235 
(0.68; 0.95)
0.707, 0.357 
(0.61; 0.92)
0.792, 0.215 
(0.72; 0.92)
.

0.767, 0.243 
(0.70; 0.93)

0.800, 0.168 
(0.74; 0.93)
0.767, 0.185 
(0.67; 0.93)
0.782, 0.253 
(0.73; 0.97)
0.734, 0.295 
(0.65; 0.95)
0.738, 0.408 
(0.67; 0.92)
0.800, 0.200 
(0.77; 0.91)
.

0.758, 0.264 
(0.68; 0.93)

Mean, SD 
(Q1; Q3)
0.623, 0.355 
(0.38; 0.88)
0.714, 0.368 
(0.71; 0.92)
0.733, 0.266 
(0.68; 0.93)
0.694, 0.271 
(0.51; 0.91)
0.641, 0.368 
(0.46; 0.91)
0.709, 0.284 
(0.62; 0.91)
0.696, 0.248 
(0.53; 0.73)
0.684, 0.317 
(0.54; 0.91)

0.786, 0.362 
(0.68; 1.00)
0.719, 0.438 
(0.64; 0.93)
0.701, 0.305 
(0.62; 0.95)
0.760, 0.241 
(0.69; 0.93)
0.701, 0.267 
(0.56; 0.91)
0.769, 0.206 
(0.75; 0.92)
0.275, 0.341 
(-0.15; 0.41)
0.728, 0.295 
(0.65; 0.93)

0.709, 0.370 
(0.54; 0.93)
0.716, 0.397 
(0.66; 0.93)
0.715, 0.288 
(0.63; 0.95)
0.725, 0.259 
(0.62; 0.92)
0.671, 0.311 
(0.52; 0.91)
0.733, 0.246 
(0.65; 0.92)
0.532, 0.374 
(0.41; 0.73)
0.706, 0.307 
(0.59; 0.92)

Mean, SD 
(Q1; Q3)
0.767, 0.487 
(0.57; 0.97)
0.688, 0.840 
(0.54; 1.00)
0.777, 0.370 
(0.66; 1.00)
0.730, 0.359 
(0.66; 0.95)
0.726, 0.251 
(0.57; 0.97)
0.765, 0.189 
(0.70; 0.92)
0.844, 0.168 
(0.74; 1.00)
0.738, 0.346 
(0.63; 0.97)

0.769, 0.571 
(0.59; 1.00)
0.614, 0.557 
(0.25; 0.95)
0.714, 0.308 
(0.59; 1.00)
0.775, 0.321 
(0.72; 0.97)
0.745, 0.217 
(0.60; 0.97)
0.804, 0.154 
(0.73; 0.95)
0.678, 0.298 
(0.52; 0.92)
0.724, 0.305 
(0.59; 0.97)

0.768, 0.528 
(0.59; 1.00)
0.650, 0.673 
(0.25; 1.00)
0.740, 0.328 
(0.60; 1.00)
0.748, 0.341 
(0.66; 0.97)
0.733, 0.237 
(0.59; 0.97)
0.785, 0.170 
(0.71; 0.95)
0.746, 0.262 
(0.52; 0.95)
0.731, 0.323 
(0.60; 0.97)

Mean, SD 
(Q1; Q3)
0.749, 0.243 
(0.65; 0.93)
0.734, 0.337 
(0.65; 0.97)
0.774, 0.282 
(0.68; 0.97)
0.728, 0.298 
(0.64; 0.92)
0.724, 0.293 
(0.62; 0.92)
0.752, 0.219 
(0.67; 0.92)
0.720, 0.257 
(0.62; 0.92)
0.740, 0.283 
(0.65; 0.93)

0.773, 0.318 
(0.70; 0.97)
0.702, 0.361 
(0.55; 0.95)
0.762, 0.265 
(0.67; 0.97)
0.770, 0.257 
(0.71; 0.97)
0.744, 0.242 
(0.65; 0.92)
0.785, 0.172 
(0.70; 0.93)
0.732, 0.233 
(0.63; 0.92)
0.753, 0.265 
(0.66; 0.95)

0.760, 0.276 
(0.66; 0.95)
0.717, 0.350 
(0.61; 0.97)
0.767, 0.272 
(0.67; 0.97)
0.748, 0.278 
(0.67; 0.93)
0.733, 0.268 
(0.63; 0.92)
0.768, 0.194 
(0.68; 0.92)
0.727, 0.241 
(0.62; 0.92)
0.746, 0.274 
(0.66; 0.93)

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184 Page 15 of 19

Fig. 3  Plot of the mean HUI-3 utility per country, by age category

these trends warrants consideration of the MID for each 
HRQoL measure.

Comparison with published literature

A  publication  of  EQ-5D-5-L  population  norms  for  23 
countries  also  showed  a  more  linear  effect  of  age,  with 
utility  values  steadily  decreasing  as  age  increased  [10]. 
In  contrast,  in  some  countries,  utility  values  and  EQ 
VAS scores showed un upward trend among people aged 
between 55 and 74 (e.g., Canada and the US), as observed 
in  our  study  [10].  Lubetkin  et  al.  similarly  found  EQ-
5D-5-L utility values increased with age in a representa-
tive panel survey of New Yorkers during the COVID-19 
pandemic  [43].  The  higher  utility  values  among  respon-
dents aged 65 and older in our study may reflect higher 
educational  levels,  which  are  associated  with  better 
health  and  self-perceived  well-being  after  retirement 
[44].  Prior  studies  have  shown  similar  patterns,  attrib-
uting  elevated  HRQoL  in  older  adults  to  education  and 
generally  good  health  status,  particularly  in  the  US  and 
Netherlands [9, 45]. Females often reported slightly more 
problems  on  several  dimensions,  resulting  in  lower  util-
ity values than males, which has also been found in pre-
viously  published  population  norms  [10].  Pain/anxiety 
was  the  dimension  with  the  highest  prevalence  of  prob-
lems  and  self-care  the  least,  which  was  also  observed 
in  POPUP  [10].  When  comparing  our  results  with 

previously  reported  population  norms,  our  EQ-5D-5-L 
utility  values  were  slightly  lower  in  most  countries,  and 
the proportion of participants reporting problems of any 
severity  was  higher.  Although  the  association  was  not 
as strong as expected, participants with cancer reported 
utility  values  on  average  0.181  lower  than  those  with-
out  health  conditions  (range:  0.086–0.289),  suggesting 
reduced  HRQoL  among  cancer  survivors.  This  was  also 
the case for HUI-3 outcomes, and here differences were 
even  larger.  These  differences  with  previously  published 
population norms will be further explored in the follow-
ing paragraphs, for both instruments.

EQ-5D norms per country

The  proportions  of  Belgian  respondents  reporting 
problems  of  any  severity  were  nearly  identical  to  those 
reported by Van Wilder et al., in the general population 
of  Belgium  in  2018  [46].  The  mean  EQ-5D-5-L  utility 
values  measured  in  that  study  were  similar  to  ours  (van 
Wilder  et  al.  =  0.840  and  POPUP = 0.853)  and  were  also 
significantly higher in males than in females.

When  comparing  our  Canadian  EQ-5D  responses  per 
dimension  to  a  previously  published  population  norms 
study based on the preferences of the Quebec population 
[47],  the  proportion  of  patients  reporting  no  problems 
was  similar  for  all  dimensions  except  pain/discomfort 
(POPUP = 43.6%  vs.  Quebec = 32.1%).  The  mean  utility 

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184  
Page 16 of 19

values  were  comparable  in  both  studies  (POPUP = 0.827 
vs.  Quebec = 0.824),  and  to  utility  values  measured  in 
the Canadian region Alberta (0.840) [48]. Mean EQ VAS 
scores  were  lower  (POPUP = 73.9,  Quebec = 75.9,  and 
Alberta = 77.4).

Four  studies  previously  reported  EQ-5D-5-L  popula-
tion norms for the German population, using data from 
2011 [49], 2012–2014 [50], 2014 [51] and 2015 [52]. Like 
our  study,  the  dimensions  with  the  highest  and  lowest 
proportion of respondents reporting “no problems” were 
self-care  and  pain/discomfort  respectively  in  all  stud-
ies. However, the EQ-5D-5-L studies based on data from 
2011 and aggregate data from 2012 to 2014 showed mark-
edly  higher  proportions  of  participants  reporting  “no 
problems”  on  all  dimensions  compared  to  POPUP.  The 
proportions of participants reporting “no problems” were 
relatively lower in our study for mobility (POPUP = 68.8% 
vs.  94.0%)  [50],  usual  activities  (POPUP = 72.5%  vs. 
86.8%)  [50],  pain/discomfort  (POPUP = 36.0%  vs.  54.4% 
[49];  68.3%  [50];  71.2%  [49]),  and  anxiety/depression 
(POPUP = 58.0%  vs.  77.4%  [49];  82.1%  [50];  74.9%  [51]. 
The  utility  value  however  was  of  similar  magnitude 
(POPUP = 0.861  vs.  0.880)  [51].  Self-perceived  health 
with  the  EQ  VAS  was  higher  in  our  sample  compared 
to the study based on data from 2014 (POPUP = 76.8 vs. 
71.6)  [51],  while  two  other  studies  observed  higher  EQ 
VAS scores (84.3 [50]; 85.1 [52]).

The  proportion  of  Spanish  respondents  in  our  study 
reporting  “no  problems”  was  similar  for  most  dimen-
sions  in  comparison  with  a  Spanish  EQ-5D  popula-
tion  norms  study  with  national  health  survey  data  from 
2011–2012 [53], but smaller for the dimensions pain/dis-
comfort  (POPUP = 52.4%  vs.  71.7%)  and  anxiety/depres-
sion  (POPUP = 53.3%  vs.  83.6%).  This  difference  may  be 
explained by the lower proportion of respondents report-
ing  medical  conditions  in  the  POPUP  study  compared 
to  the  Spanish  study  (POPUP = 58.0%  vs.  73.6%).  While 
the  POPUP  study  collected  more  detailed  information 
on  medical  conditions,  the  previous  study  recorded  the 
presence  of  at  least  one  medical  condition  as  a  binary 
variable  (yes/no).  Despite  these  differences  in  the  EQ-
5D-5-L response distributions, utility values in the Span-
ish  general  population  were  comparable  to  our  study 
(POPUP = 0.865  vs.  0.897),  as  were  the  mean  EQ  VAS 
scores (POPUP = 76.9 vs. 75.7) [53].

Similarly  to  EQ-5D-5-L  population  norms  based  on 
data collected in six American metropolitan areas in 2017 
[9], self-care was the dimension with the fewest reported 
problems (POPUP = 12.0% vs. 6.5%), whilst pain/discom-
fort  had  the  highest  proportion  of  respondents  report-
ing  problems  (POPUP  52.5%  vs.  51.0%). The  proportion 
of patients reporting no problems was similar to slightly 
higher  in  our  study  for  all  dimensions  except  self-care 
(POPUP = 88.0% vs. 93.5%) [9].

HUI-3

Age-  and  sex-specific  Canadian  utility  standards,  based 
on the Canadian Community Health Survey 2013–2014, 
reported mean (95% CI) HUI-3 utilities of all ages in the 
Canadian population of 0.863 (0.861–0.865) [54]. This is 
markedly,  and  significantly  higher  than  the  mean  utility 
value  of  0.736  found  in  our  study  for  the  adult  general 
population  of  Canada,  and  this  observation  was  consis-
tently found across all age groups. Possible explanations 
of the difference are cohort effects (there is a 10-year dif-
ference in the data collection dates), the COVID-19 pan-
demic  (which  started  eight  months  before  the  POPUP 
data  collection  and  had  not  ended  when  collecting  the 
data).

HUI-3  populations  norms  were  also  produced  for  the 
general adult US population based on the 2002 US Cen-
sus  [55].  A  mean  HUI-3  utility  value  of  0.81  was  found 
in the US study, with notably higher values in individuals 
between  18  and  44  years  of  age  (0.86).  These  values  are 
markedly  higher  than  the  mean  HUI-3  utility  values  of 
0.731 we observed for the US adult population in POPUP. 
The fifteen years lag in these two data collections is cer-
tainly responsible for part of this difference; the COVID-
19 pandemic could be for another part. Furthermore, the 
US study purposely oversampled on Hispanic and Black 
individuals,  which  were  the  respondents  with  the  high-
est  utility  values.  Furthermore,  the  US  Census  was  con-
ducted face to face, so any differences could also be due 
to  the  mode  of  administration.  Comparison  of  HUI-3 
utility  scores  across  the  countries  included  in  our  study 
is limited by the absence of country-specific HUI-3 value 
sets.  Further  research  is  needed  to  develop  and  validate 
these  value  sets  to  ensure  more  accurate  and  culturally 
relevant utility estimates for international comparisons.

EQ-5D-5-L bolt-ons

Bolt-ons to the EQ-5D-5-L are increasingly being devel-
oped  and  used  [16].  However,  comparing  results  across 
studies  remain  challenging,  as  most  investigations  are 
conducted  in  patient  populations.  To  the  best  of  our 
knowledge, only two studies have assessed bolt-ons simi-
lar to those used in our study within general population 
samples,  specifically  in  Hungary  and  Australia  [56,  57]. 
Compared  to  the  POPUP  sample,  the  Hungarian  gen-
eral  population  reported  lower  proportions  of  severe-
to-extreme  problems  across  all  bolt-ons:  vision  (1.0%), 
breathing (0.0%), sleep (1.0%), tiredness (3.1%), self-con-
fidence (5.0%), and social relationships (2.2%) [56]. In the 
Australian  general  population,  where  only  the  breath-
ing  bolt-on  was  evaluated,  a  comparable  proportion  of 
severe-to-extreme  problems  was  reported  (3.3%)  [57]. 
Further  research  is  needed  to  better  understand  how 
these  bolt-ons  perform  across  different  populations  and 
contexts, and to establish normative values that support 

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184 their  use  in  both  clinical  and  population  health  settings 
[58].

Strengths and limitations
Strengths

Data were collected among a large sample of the general 
population for two prominent HRQoL measures, in eight 
different  countries.  This  study  presents  up  to  date  nor-
mative HRQoL data which can be used for model-based 
economic  evaluations  for  the  estimation  of  QALYs  and 
for  comparison  of  specific  patient  groups  with  the  gen-
eral populations of all included countries. Only one mode 
of administration was used, increasing the comparability 
of population norms across countries.

Limitations

Several limitations should be considered when interpret-
ing the results of this study and considering its implica-
tions for healthcare policy and practice. Our sample sizes 
(N = 2,000  in  the  US;  N = 1,000  in  other  countries)  yield 
margins  of  error  of  3.2%  and  2.2%,  respectively—well 
below  the  commonly  accepted  10%  threshold  [20].  Still, 
these  margins  should  be  considered  when  interpreting 
results, as samples may not fully reflect national popula-
tions. Differences in education levels, for example, could 
influence  utility  values  and  health  profiles.  Although 
sampling was stratified by age, sex, education, and region, 
no  data  were  available  on  chronic  conditions  or  treat-
ment  status  at  the  recruitment  stage,  so  the  presence 
of  cancer  or  other  health  conditions  was  not  accounted 
for.  This  may  partly  explain  the  non-significant  differ-
ences  in  HRQoL  between  cancer  patients  and  healthy 
individuals.  Selection  bias  is  also  possible,  as  the  online 
survey  excluded  those  without  internet  access.  Addi-
tionally,  the  use  of  incentives  may  have  attracted  par-
ticipants  with  lower  socioeconomic  status,  affecting 
sample  representativeness  [59].  Furthermore,  data  were 
collected  during  the  COVID-19  pandemic,  which  could 
have  negatively  impacted  our  outcomes  and  affect  the 
external  validity  of  our  findings.  According  to  a  system-
atic  review  [60],  the  pandemic  significantly  affected  all 
dimensions  of  the  EQ-5D-5-L,  and  had  negative  impact 
on the HRQoL of the general population. A study on the 
impact of COVID-19 in the US concluded the same, and 
found  that  especially  the  mental  health  of  young  adults 
was  impacted  [61].  While  these  studies  provide  a  viable 
explanation  for  disparities  observed  in,  for  example,  the 
proportion  of  individuals  reporting  ‘no  problems’,  and 
varying anxiety/depression levels compared to previously 
published  population  norms,  other  literature  does  not 
support  this  reasoning.  A  longitudinal  study  found  that 
the HRQoL of respondents in five different countries was 
not  or  only  slightly  deteriorated  over  the  period  of  one 
year during the COVID-19 pandemic [62, 63]. Similarly, 

Page 17 of 19

another  study  concluded  that  HRQoL  collected  during 
the COVID-19 pandemic can still confidently be used in 
clinical  research  [63].  Altogether,  it  remains  difficult  to 
pinpoint  the  exact  impact  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic 
on our data since this differs per country, and almost no 
data  is  available  to  explain  its  impact  on  bolt-ons  and 
the  HUI-3.  Finally,  while  the  HUI-3  and  EQ-5D-5-L  are 
widely used and validated measures of health status, they 
may not capture all aspects of health that are important 
to  individuals  or  may  not  be  sensitive  enough  to  detect 
subtle differences in health status between individuals.

Conclusion
With this multinational digital study, we present popula-
tion norms for a wide range of HRQoL instruments and 
dimensions,  some  of  which  have  not  been  previously 
published. This  detailed  insight  into  the  health  status  of 
the  general  population  in  these  eight  countries  may  be 
valuable  for  health  care  policy  and  resource  allocation. 
Moreover,  data  from  this  study  can  serve  as  reference 
point or baseline for future studies. Lastly, significant dif-
ferences  were  found  between  countries  and  subgroups, 
highlighting  the  need  for  country-specific  population 
norms.

Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r 
g /  1 0 .  1 1 8 6  / s  1 3 6 9 0 - 0 2 5 - 0 1 6 4 2 - z.

Supplementary Material 1

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank all the participants of the study for sharing 
their HRQoL data.

Author contributions
SD designed and conducted the study, analyzed and interpreted the data, 
prepared figures and tables, and partly wrote the manuscript text. NHT 
interpreted the data, prepared tables, and wrote the main manuscript text. 
GP and SP contributed to the design and conduct of the study and the 
interpretation of data. MFJ designed and conducted the study, analyzed and 
interpreted the data, prepared figures, and partly wrote the manuscript text. 
All authors reviewed and approved the manuscript.

Funding
The study design, data collection, data analysis and manuscript writing were 
funded by argenx BV, Ghent, Belgium.

Data availability
Anonymized, aggregated study data is available upon reasonable request 
through the corresponding author.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
We confirm that we have read the Journal’s position on issues involved 
in ethical publication and affirm that this report is consistent with those 
guidelines. All participants signed an informed consent form. The study was 
performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184 Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
SD, the principal investigator of the study, MFJ and NHT have been 
commissioned by argenx BV and received honoraria to design the study, 
analyze and report the data. GP and SP are employees of argenx BV.

Received: 28 March 2024 / Accepted: 29 May 2025

References
1. 

2. 

3. 

5. 

Jackowski D, Guyatt G. A guide to health measurement. Clin Orthop Relat Res 
[Internet]. 2003 [cited 2025 Apr 8];413:80–9. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . 
n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 1 2 8 9 7 5 9 9 /
Cella DF. Quality of life: concepts and definition. J Pain Symptom Manage 
[Internet]. 1994 [cited 2025 Apr 8];9:186–92. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . 
n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 8 0 1 4 5 3 0 /
Patrick DL, Deyo RA. Generic and disease-specific measures in assessing 
health status and quality of life. Med Care [Internet]. 1989 [cited 2025 Apr 
8];27:S217–32. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 6 4 6 4 9 0 /
4.  Herdman M, Gudex C, Lloyd A, Janssen M, Kind P, Parkin D et al. Development 
and preliminary testing of the new five-level version of EQ-5D (EQ-5D-5L). 
Qual Life Res [Internet]. 2011 [cited 2024 Oct 4];20:1727–36. Available from:  h t 
t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 1 4 7 9 7 7 7 /
Feeny D, Furlong W, Boyle M, Torrance GW. Multi-attribute health status clas-
sification systems. Health Utilities Index. Pharmacoeconomics [Internet]. 1995 
[cited 2025 Mar 13];7:490–502. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g 
o v / 1 0 1 5 5 3 3 5 /
Brazier J, Ratcliffe J, Saloman J, Tsuchiya A. Measuring and valuing health 
benefits for economic evaluation. Case Studies in Clinical Psychological Sci-
ence: Bridging the Gap from Science to Practice [Internet]. 2016 [cited 2025 
Apr 8];1–7. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / a c a  d e  m i c  . o u  p . c o  m /  b o o k / 2 4 4 3 7
Szende A, Janssen B, Cabasés J. Self-reported population health: an inter-
national perspective based on EQ-5D [Internet]. Self-Reported Population 
Health: An International Perspective Based on EQ-5D [Internet]. 2014 [cited 
2025 Apr 8];1–196. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 9 7 8 7 0 4 
4 /
Janssen MF, Szende A, Cabases J, Ramos-Goñi JM, Vilagut G, König HH. 
Population norms for the EQ-5D-3L: a cross-country analysis of population 
surveys for 20 countries. Eur J Health Econ [Internet]. 2019 [cited 2025 Apr 
8];20:205–16. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 9 4 4 5 9 4 1 /
Jiang R, Janssen MFB, Pickard AS. US population norms for the EQ-5D-5L and 
comparison of norms from face-to-face and online samples. Qual Life Res 
[Internet]. 2021 [cited 2025 Apr 8];30:803–16. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . 
n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 3 3 0 2 5 3 7 3 /

9. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

10.  Wang Z, Luo N, Wang P. A comparative analysis of EQ-5D-5L general popula-

tion norms across 23 countries: Gender and age disparities. Pharmacoeco-
nomics and Policy [Internet]. 2025 [cited 2025 May 13];1:5–14. Available from:  
h t t p  s : /  / l i n  k i  n g h  u b .  e l s e  v i  e r .  c o m  / r e t  r i  e v e  / p i  i / S 2  9 5  0 2 6 6 7 2 5 0 0 0 0 4 7

11.  Luo N, Johnson JA, Shaw JW, Feeny D, Coons SJ. Self-reported health status 

of the general adult U.S. Population as assessed by the EQ-5D and health 
utilities index. Med Care. 2005;43:1078–86.

12.  Guertin JR, Humphries B, Feeny D, Tarride J-E. Health reports health utilities 
index mark 3 scores for major chronic conditions: Population norms for 
Canada based on the 2013 and 2014 Canadian Community Health Survey. 
Available from: www.statcan.gc.ca

13.  Longworth L, Yang Y, Young T, Mulhern B, Hernández Alava M, Mukuria C et 
al. Use of generic and condition-specific measures of health-related quality 
of life in NICE decision-making: a systematic review, statistical modelling and 
survey. Health Technol Assess [Internet]. 2014 [cited 2025 Apr 8];18:1. Avail-
able from:  h t t p  s : /  / p m c  . n  c b i  . n l  m . n i  h .  g o v  / a r  t i c l  e s  / P M C 4 7 8 0 9 5 4 /

14.  Shah KK, Mulhern B, Longworth L, Janssen MF. Views of the UK general public 
on important aspects of health not captured by EQ-5D. Patient [Internet]. 
2017 [cited 2025 Apr 8];10:701–9. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i 
h . g o v / 2 8 4 0 9 4 8 1 /

15.  Efthymiadou O, Mossman J, Kanavos P. Health related quality of life aspects 
not captured by EQ-5D-5L: Results from an international survey of patients. 
Health Policy [Internet]. 2019 [cited 2025 Apr 8];123:159–65. Available from:  h 
t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 3 0 5 9 8 2 3 9 /

Page 18 of 19

16.  Geraerds AJLM, Bonsel GJ, Janssen MF, Finch AP, Polinder S, Haagsma 

JA. Methods used to identify, test, and assess impact on preferences of 
Bolt-Ons: a systematic review. Value Health [Internet]. 2021 [cited 2025 Mar 
13];24:901–16. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 3 4 1 1 9 0 8 8 /

17.  Long D, Bonsel GJ, Lubetkin EI, Janssen MF, Haagsma JA. Anxiety, depression, 
and social connectedness among the general population of eight countries 
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Arch Public Health [Internet]. 2022 [cited 
2025 Apr 8];80. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 3 6 3 9 7 0 9 9 /
18.  Finch AP, Brazier JE, Mukuria C. Selecting bolt-on dimensions for the EQ-5D: 

examining their contribution to health-related quality of life. Value Health 
[Internet]. 2019 [cited 2025 Mar 13];22:50–61. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d 
. n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 3 0 6 6 1 6 3 4 /

19.  Dewilde S, Tollenaar NH, Phillips G, Paci S, Janssen MF. Observational 

cross-sectional study to estimate population norms in eight countries: 
the popup study protocol. medRxiv [Internet]. 2025 [cited 2025 Mar 
31];2025.03.24.25324318. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / w w w  . m  e d r  x i v  . o r g  / c  o n t  e n t  /  h 
t  t p s  : / /  d o i .  o r  g / 1  0 . 1  1 0 1 /  2 0  2 5 . 0 3 . 2 4 . 2 5 3 2 4 3 1 8 v 1

20.  Serdar CC, Cihan M, Yücel D, Serdar MA. Sample size, power and effect size 

revisited: simplified and practical approaches in pre-clinical, clinical and 
laboratory studies. Biochem Med (Zagreb) [Internet]. 2021 [cited 2025 Mar 
13];31:1–27. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 3 3 3 8 0 8 8 7 /
21.  Wiegand H, Kish L: Survey Sampling. John Wiley, Sons I, York N, IX + 643 S. 

London, 31 Abb., 56 Tab., Preis 83 s. Biom Z [Internet]. 1968 [cited 2025 Apr 
10];10:88–9. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / o n l  i n  e l i  b r a  r y . w  i l  e y .  c o m  / d o i  / f  u l l  /  h t t  p s  : / /  d o 
i  . o r g  / 1  0 . 1 0 0 2 / b i m j . 1 9 6 8 0 1 0 0 1 2 2

22.  Rosenbaum PR, Rubin DB. The central role of the propensity score in obser-

vational studies for causal effects. Biometrika [Internet]. 1983 [cited 2025 Apr 
9];70:41–55. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / d o i  . o  r g /  1 0 .  1 0 9 3  / b  i o m e t / 7 0 . 1 . 4 1

23.  Bilendi [Internet]. [cited 2025 Apr 9]. Available from: https://www.bilendi.be/
24.  Axentiva|. Axentiva Solutions [Internet]. [cited 2025 Apr 9]. Available from: 

https://www.axentiva.com/

25.  Yang Y, Rowen D, Brazier J, Tsuchiya A, Young T, Longworth L. An exploratory 

study to test the impact on three bolt-on items to the EQ-5D. Value Health 
[Internet]. 2015 [cited 2025 Mar 13];18:52–60. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d 
. n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 5 5 9 5 2 3 4 /

26.  Hoogendoorn M, Oppe M, Boland MRS, Goossens LMA, Stolk EA, Rutten–van 

Mölken MPMH. Exploring the impact of adding a respiratory dimension to 
the EQ-5D-5L. Med Decis Making [Internet]. 2019 [cited 2025 Mar 13];39:393–
404. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 3 1 0 9 2 1 1 1 /

27.  Yang Y, Brazier J, Tsuchiya A. Effect of adding a sleep dimension to the EQ-5D 
descriptive system: a bolt-on experiment. Medical Decision Making [Internet]. 
2014;34:42–53. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / j o u  r n  a l s  . s a  g e p u  b .  c o m  / d o  i / a b  s /  1 0 .  1 1 7  
7 / 0 2  7 2  9 8 9 X 1 3 4 8 0 4 2 8

28.  Swinburn P, Lloyd A, Boye KS, Edson-Heredia E, Bowman L, Janssen B. 

Development of a disease-specific version of the EQ-5D-5L for use in patients 
suffering from psoriasis: lessons learned from a feasibility study in the UK. 
Value Health [Internet]. 2013 [cited 2025 Mar 13];16:1156–62. Available from:  
h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 4 3 2 6 1 6 9 /

29.  Richardson J, Khan MA, Iezzi A, Maxwell A. Comparing and explaining differ-
ences in the magnitude, content, and sensitivity of utilities predicted by the 
EQ-5D, SF-6D, HUI 3, 15D, QWB, and AQoL-8D multiattribute utility instru-
ments. Med Decis Making [Internet]. 2015 [cited 2025 Mar 13];35:276–91. 
Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 5 1 5 9 1 7 2 /

30.  Bouckaert N, Cleemput I, Devriese S, Gerkens S, An. EQ-5D-5L Value set for 

Belgium. Pharmacoecon Open [Internet]. 2022 [cited 2025 Apr 14];6:823. 
Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p m c  . n  c b i  . n l  m . n i  h .  g o v  / a r  t i c l  e s  / P M C 9 3 6 2 6 3 9 /
31.  Pickard AS, Law EH, Jiang R, Pullenayegum E, Shaw JW, Xie F et al. United 

States valuation of EQ-5D-5L health states using an international protocol. 
Value Health [Internet]. 2019 [cited 2025 Apr 14];22:931–41. Available from:  h t 
t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 3 1 4 2 6 9 3 5 /

32.  Xie F, Pullenayegum E, Gaebel K, Bansback N, Bryan S, Ohinmaa A et al. A 
Time Trade-off-derived Value Set of the EQ-5D-5L for Canada. Med Care 
[Internet]. 2015 [cited 2025 Apr 14];54:98. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p m c  . n  c b i  . n l  
m . n i  h .  g o v  / a r  t i c l  e s  / P M C 4 6 7 4 1 4 0 /

33.  Devlin NJ, Shah KK, Feng Y, Mulhern B, van Hout B. Valuing health-related 

quality of life: An EQ-5D-5L value set for England. Health Econ [Internet]. 2018 
[cited 2025 Apr 14];27:7–22. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v 
/ 2 8 8 3 3 8 6 9 /

34.  Finch AP, Meregaglia M, Ciani O, Roudijk B, Jommi C. An EQ-5D-5L value set 

for Italy using videoconferencing interviews and feasibility of a new mode of 
administration. Soc Sci Med [Internet]. 2022 [cited 2025 Apr 14];292. Available 
from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 3 4 7 3 6 8 0 4 /

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184 Page 19 of 19

35.  Versteegh M, Vermeulen M, Evers KMAA, de Wit S, Prenger GA, Stolk RA. E. 

51.  Grochtdreis T, Dams J, König HH, Konnopka A. Health-related quality of life 

Dutch tariff for the five-level version of EQ-5D. Value Health [Internet]. 2016 
[cited 2025 Apr 14];19:343–52. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g 
o v / 2 7 3 2 5 3 2 6 /

36.  Ludwig K, von der Graf JM, Greiner W. German Value Set for the EQ-5D-5L. 

Pharmacoeconomics [Internet]. 2018 [cited 2025 Apr 14];36:663–74. Available 
from:  h t t p  s : /  / l i n  k .  s p r  i n g  e r . c  o m  / a r  t i c  l e /   h t t  p s :  / / d o  i .  o r g  / 1 0  . 1 0 0  7 /  s 4 0 2 7 3 - 0 1 8 - 0 6 
1 5 - 8

37.  Hernandez G, Garin O, Pardo Y, Vilagut G, Pont À, Suárez M et al. Validity of 

the EQ-5D-5L and reference norms for the Spanish population. Qual Life Res 
[Internet]. 2018 [cited 2025 Apr 14];27:2337–48. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m 
e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 9 7 6 7 3 2 9 /

38.  Guertin JR, Feeny D, Tarride JE. Age- and sex-specific Canadian utility norms, 
based on the 2013–2014 Canadian Community Health Survey. CMAJ [Inter-
net]. 2018 [cited 2025 Apr 14];190:E155–61. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p m c  . n  c b i  . 
n l  m . n i  h .  g o v  / a r  t i c l  e s  / P M C 5 8 0 9 2 1 5 /

39.  Evans JD. Straightforward statistics for the behavioral sciences. 1996 [cited 

2025 Mar 13];600. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / b o o  k s  . g o  o g l  e . c o  m /  b o o  k s /  a b o u  t /  S t r  
a i g  h t f o  r w  a r d  _ S t  a t i s  t i  c s _  f o r  _ t h e  _ B  e h a  v . h  t m l ?  h l  = n l & i d = 8 C a 2 A A A A I A A J
40.  Luo N, Johnson JA, Coons SJ. Using instrument-defined health state transi-

tions to estimate minimally important differences for four preference-based 
health-related quality of life instruments. Med Care [Internet]. 2010 [cited 
2025 Apr 15];48:365–71. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 0 
3 5 5 2 6 6 /

41.  McClure NS, Sayah F, Al, Xie F, Luo N, Johnson JA. Instrument-defined esti-

mates of the minimally important difference for EQ-5D-5L index scores. Value 
Health [Internet]. 2017 [cited 2025 Apr 15];20:644–50. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / 
p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 8 4 0 8 0 0 7 /

42.  Drummond M. Introducing economic and quality of life measurements into 
clinical studies. Ann Med [Internet]. 2001 [cited 2025 Apr 15];33:344–9. Avail-
able from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 1 1 4 9 1 1 9 3 /

43.  Lubetkin EI, Long D, Haagsma JA, Janssen MF, Bonsel GJ. Health inequities 
as measured by the EQ-5D-5L during COVID-19: Results from New York in 
healthy and diseased persons. PLoS One [Internet]. 2022 [cited 2025 Apr 
15];17. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 3 5 9 0 1 0 7 1 /

44.  Teques AP, Carreiro J, Duarte D, Teques P. Wellbeing and retirement in Europe: 
a systematic review with meta-analysis. Healthcare [Internet]. 2025 [cited 
2025 May 13];13:100. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p m c  . n  c b i  . n l  m . n i  h .  g o v  / a r  t i c l  e s  / P 
M C 1 1 7 6 5 0 4 1 /

45.  Clarijs ME, Kregting LM, van Ravesteyn NT, Koppert LB, Korfage IJ. Health-

related quality of life using the EQ-5D-5L: normative utility scores in a Dutch 
female population. Quality of Life Research [Internet]. 2022 [cited 2025 May 
13];32:373. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p m c  . n  c b i  . n l  m . n i  h .  g o v  / a r  t i c l  e s  / P M C 9 5 8 4 2 3 
7 /

46.  Van Wilder L, Charafeddine R, Beutels P, Bruyndonckx R, Cleemput I, Demar-
est S et al. Belgian population norms for the EQ-5D-5L, 2018. Qual Life Res 
[Internet]. 2022 [cited 2025 Apr 15];31:527–37. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  
d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 3 4 4 0 6 5 7 7 /

47.  Poder TG, Carrier N, Kouakou CRC. Quebec health-related quality-of-life 

population norms using the EQ-5D-5L: decomposition by sociodemographic 
data and health problems. Value Health [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2025 Apr 
15];23:251–9. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 3 2 1 1 3 6 3 1 /
48.  EQ-5D Population. Norms [Internet]. [cited 2025 Apr 15]. Available from:  h t t p  s 
: /  / s i t  e s  . g o  o g l  e . c o  m /  u a l  b e r  t a . c  a /  a p e  r s u  / a b o  u t  - e q  - 5 d  / e q -  5 d  - p o p u l a t i o n - n o r m 
s

49.  Hinz A, Kohlmann T, Stöbel-Richter Y, Zenger M, Brähler E. The quality of life 
questionnaire EQ-5D-5L: psychometric properties and normative values for 
the general German population. Qual Life Res [Internet]. 2014 [cited 2025 Apr 
15];23:443–7. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 3 9 2 1 5 9 7 /
50.  Huber MB, Reitmeir P, Vogelmann M, Leidl R. EQ-5D-5L in the general German 
population: comparison and evaluation of three yearly cross-section surveys. 
Int J Environ Res Public Health [Internet]. 2016 [cited 2025 Apr 15];13. Avail-
able from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 7 0 0 7 3 8 7 /

measured with the EQ-5D-5L: estimation of normative index values based on 
a representative German population sample and value set. Eur J Health Econ 
[Internet]. 2019 [cited 2025 Apr 15];20:933–44. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  
d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 3 1 0 3 0 2 9 2 /

52.  Huber MB, Felix J, Vogelmann M, Leidl R. Health-related quality of life of the 

general German population in 2015: results from the EQ-5D-5L. Int J Environ 
Res Public Health [Internet]. 2017 [cited 2025 Apr 15];14. Available from:  h t t p  s 
: /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 8 4 2 0 1 5 3 /

53.  Garcia-Gordillo MA, Adsuar JC, Olivares PR. Normative values of EQ-5D-5L: 

in a Spanish representative population sample from Spanish Health Survey, 
2011. Qual Life Res [Internet]. 2016 [cited 2025 Apr 15];25:1313–21. Available 
from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 6 4 8 2 8 2 5 /

54.  Guertin JR, Feeny D, Tarride JE. Age- and sex-specific Canadian utility norms, 
based on the 2013–2014 Canadian Community Health Survey. CMAJ [Inter-
net]. 2018 [cited 2025 Apr 15];190:E155–61. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  
c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 9 4 4 0 3 3 5 /

55.  Luo N, Johnson JA, Shaw JW, Feeny D, Coons SJ. Self-reported health status 

of the general adult U.S. population as assessed by the EQ-5D and Health 
Utilities Index. Med Care [Internet]. 2005 [cited 2025 Apr 15];43:1078–86. 
Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 1 6 2 2 4 3 0 0 /

56.  Rencz F, Janssen MF. Testing the psychometric properties of 9 Bolt-Ons for 

the EQ-5D-5L in a general population sample. Value Health. 2024;27:943–54.

57.  Bahrampour M, Kochovska S, Currow DC, Viney R, Mulhern B. Testing the 

psychometric characteristics of EQ-5D-5L and respiratory bolt-ons using a 
sample of the Australian population. Quality of Life Research [Internet]. 2024 
[cited 2025 Mar 27];34:395–403. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / l i n  k .  s p r  i n g  e r . c  o m  / a r  t i 
c  l e /   h t t  p s :  / / d o  i .  o r g  / 1 0  . 1 0 0  7 /  s 1 1 1 3 6 - 0 2 4 - 0 3 8 1 7 - 7

58.  Mulhern BJ, Sampson C, Haywood P, Addo R, Page K, Mott D et al. Criteria for 
developing, assessing and selecting candidate EQ-5D bolt-ons. Qual Life Res 
[Internet]. 2022 [cited 2025 Mar 13];31:3041–8. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  
d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 3 5 4 8 6 2 1 6 /

59.  Resnik D. Bioethical issues in providing financial incentives to research par-

ticipants. Medicoleg Bioeth [Internet]. 2015 [cited 2025 Apr 15];5:35. Available 
from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i h . g o v / 2 6 8 0 7 3 9 9 /

60.  Nshimirimana DA, Kokonya D, Gitaka J, Wesonga B, Mativo JN, Rukanikigitero 
JMV. Impact of COVID-19 on health-related quality of life in the general 
population: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLOS Global Public 
Health [Internet]. 2023 [cited 2025 Apr 15];3:e0002137. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  
/ j o u  r n  a l s  . p l  o s . o  r g  / g l  o b a  l p u b  l i  c h e  a l t  h / a r  t i  c l e  ? i d  = 1 0 .  1 3  7 1 / j o u r n a l . p g p h . 0 0 0 2 1 
3 7

61.  Hay JW, Gong CL, Jiao X, Zawadzki NK, Zawadzki RS, Pickard AS et al. A US 

population health survey on the impact of COVID-19 using the EQ-5D-5L. J 
Gen Intern Med [Internet]. 2021 [cited 2025 Apr 15];36:1292–301. Available 
from:  h t t p  s : /  / e u r  o p  e p m  c . o  r g / a  r t  i c l e s / P M C 7 9 3 9 4 4 6

62.  Long D, Bonsel GJ, Lubetkin EI, Yfantopoulos JN, Janssen MF, Haagsma JA. 
Health-related quality of life and mental well-being during the COVID-19 
pandemic in five countries: a one-year longitudinal study. J Clin Med [Inter-
net]. 2022 [cited 2025 Apr 15];11. Available from:  h t t p  s : /  / p u b  m e  d . n  c b i  . n l m  . n  i 
h . g o v / 3 6 3 6 2 6 9 4 /

63.  Cohen A, Selles RW, De Ridder WA, Ter Stege MHP, Souer JS, Wouters RM. 

What Is the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on quality of life and other 
patient-reported outcomes? an analysis of the hand-wrist study cohort. Clin 
Orthop Relat Res [Internet]. 2021 [cited 2025 Apr 15];479:335–45. Available 
from:  h t t p s :   /  / p u b m e   d .  n c b   i . n   l m  . n  i h .  g o v / 3 3 0 4 4 3 1 4 /

Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Dewilde et al. Archives of Public Health          (2025) 83:184
